ASTOUNDING STORIES OF SUPER-SCIENCE
    20¢
   _On Sale the First Thursday of Each Month_
W. M. CLAYTON, Publisher HARRY BATES, Editor DOUGLAS M. DOLD,
Consulting Editor
The Clayton Standard on a Magazine Guarantees:
 _That_ the stories therein are clean, interesting, vivid; by
 leading writers of the day and purchased under conditions
 approved by the Authors' League of America;
 _That_ such magazines are manufactured in Union shops by
 American workmen;
 _That_ each newsdealer and agent is insured a fair profit;
 _That_ an intelligent censorship guards their advertising
 pages.
 _The other Clayton magazines are_:
ACE-HIGH MAGAZINE, RANCH ROMANCES, COWBOY STORIES, CLUES, FIVE-NOVELS
MONTHLY, WIDE WORLD ADVENTURES, ALL STAR DETECTIVE STORIES, RANGELAND
LOVE STORY MAGAZINE, WESTERN ADVENTURES, _and_ FOREST AND STREAM
_More Than Two Million Copies Required to Supply the Monthly Demand
for Clayton Magazines._
  *  *  *  *  *
VOL. II, No. 2 CONTENTS MAY, 1930
COVER DESIGN   H. W. WESSOLOWSKI
  _Painted in Water-colors from a Scene in_ "_The Atom-Smasher_."
INTO THE OCEAN'S DEPTHS  SEWELL PEASLEE WRIGHT   151
  _To Save Imee's Race of Men-Who-Returned-To-The-Sea, Two Land-Men
 Answer the Challenge of the Dreaded Rorn, Corsairs of the Under-Seas._
MURDER MADNESS MURRAY LEINSTER 166
  _Murder Madness! Seven Secret Service Men Had Completely Disappeared.
 Another Had Been Found a Screaming, Homicidal Maniac, Whose Fingers
 Writhed Like Snakes. So Bell, of the Secret "Trade," Plunges into
 South America After The Master--the Mighty, Unknown Octopus of Power
 Whose Diabolical Poison Threatens a Continent!_ (_Beginning a
 Four-part Novel._)
BRIGANDS OF THE MOON   RAY CUMMINGS   195
  _Gregg and Anita Risk Quick, Sure Death in a Desperate Bluff on the
 Ruthless Martian Brigands._ (_Part Three of a Four-part Novel._)
THE JOVIAN JEST LILITH LORRAINE 228
  _There Came to Our Pigmy Planet a Radiant Wanderer with a Message--and
 a Jest--from the Vasty Universe._
THE ATOM-SMASHER   VICTOR ROUSSEAU 234
  _Four Destinies Rocket Through the Strange Time-Space of the Fourth
 Dimension in Tode's Marvelous Atom-Smasher._ (_A Complete Novelette._)
THE READERS' CORNER  ALL OF US  277
  _A Meeting Place for Readers of Astounding Stories._
Single Copies, 20 Cents (In Canada, 25 Cents) Yearly Subscription,
$2.00
Issued monthly by Publishers' Fiscal Corporation, 80 Lafayette St.,
New York, N. Y. W. M. Clayton, President; Nathan Goldmann, Secretary.
Application for entry as second-class mail pending at the Post Office
at New York, under Act of March 3, 1879. Title registered as a Trade
Mark in the U. S. Patent Office. Member Newsstand Group--Men's List.
For advertising rates address E. R. Crowe & Co., Inc., 25 Vanderbilt
Ave., New York; or 225 North Michigan Ave., Chicago.
  *  *  *  *  *
Into the Ocean's Depths
A Sequel to "From the Ocean's Depths"
_By Sewell Peaslee Wright_
[Illustration: The two shark-faced creatures were dragging at my arms
and legs.]
[Sidenote: To save Imee's race of Men-Who-Returned-To-The-Sea, two
Land-Men answer the challenge of the dreaded Rorn, corsairs of the
under-seas.]
I read the telegram for the second time. Then I folded it up, put it
in my pocket, and pressed the little button on my desk. My mind was
made up.
"Miss Fentress, I'm leaving this afternoon on an extended trip. The
Florida address will reach me after Thursday. Tell Wade and Bennett to
carry on. I think you have everything in hand? Is everything clear to
you?"
"Yes, Mr. Taylor." Miss Fentress was not in the least surprised. She
was used to my sudden trips. The outfit got along perfectly without
me; sometimes I think my frequent absences are good for the business.
The boys work like the devil to make a fine showing while I'm away.
And Miss Fentress is a perfect gem of a secretary. I had nothing to
worry about there.
"Fine! Will you get my diggings on the phone?" I hurriedly put my few
papers in place, and signed a couple of letters. Then Josef was on the
wire.
"Josef? Pack my bags right away, will you? For Florida. The usual
things.... Yes, right away. I'll be leaving by noon.... Yes, driving
through."
  *  *  *  *  *
That was that. There were a few more letters to sign, a few hasty
instructions to be given regarding one or two matters that were
hanging fire. Then, on my way to my bachelor apartments, I read the
telegram through again:
 THINK IT WORTH WHILE IF YOU FEEL ADVENTUROUS AND HAVE
 NOTHING PRESSING TO COME TO THE MONSTROSITY STOP MAKE YOUR
 WILL FIRST STOP SHALL LOOK FOR YOU ANY DAY AS I KNOW YOU ARE
 ALWAYS LOOKING FOR EXCITEMENT AND NEVER HAVE ANYTHING
 IMPORTANT TO DO SO DON'T BOTHER TO WIRE STOP PERHAPS WE
 SHALL SEE HER AGAIN
    MERCER
I smiled at Mercer's frank opinion of my disposition and my importance
to my business. But I frowned over the admonition to make my will, and
the last telling statement in the wire: "Perhaps we shall see her
again." I knew whom he meant by "her."
Josef had my bags waiting for me. A few hurried instructions, most of
them shouted over my shoulder, and I was purring down the main drag,
my duffel in the rumble, and the roadster headed due south.
"Perhaps we shall see her again." Those words from the telegram kept
coming before my eyes. Mercer knew what he was about, if he wanted my
company, when he put that line in his wire.
  *  *  *  *  *
I have already told the story of our first meeting with the strange
being from the ocean's depths that, wounded and senseless, had been
flung up on the beach near Warren Mercer's Florida estate. In all the
history of civilization, no stranger bit of flotsam had ever been cast
up by a storm.
Neither of us would ever forget that slim white creature, swathed in
her veil of long, light golden hair, as she crouched on the bottom of
Mercer's swimming pool, and pictured for us, by means of Mercer's
thought-telegraph (my own name for the device; he has a long and
scientific title for it with as many joints as a centipede), the story
of her people.
They had lived in a country of steaming mist, when the world was very
young. They had been forced into the sea to obtain food, and after
many generations they had gone back to the sea as man once emerged
from it. They had grown webs on their hands and feet, and they
breathed oxygen dissolved in water, as fishes do, instead of taking it
from the atmosphere. And under the mighty Atlantic, somewhere, were
their villages.
The girl had pictured all these things for us, and then--nearly a year
ago, now--she had pleaded with us to let her return to her people. And
so we had put her back into the sea, and she had bade us farewell. But
just before she disappeared, she had done a strange thing.
  *  *  *  *  *
She had pointed, under the water, out towards the depth, and then,
with a broad, sweeping motion of her arm, she had indicated the shore,
as though to promise, it seemed to me, that she intended to return.
And now, Mercer said, we might see her again! How? Mercer,
conservative and scientific, was not the man to make rash promises.
But how...?
The best way to solve the riddle was to reach Mercer, and I broke the
speed laws of five states three days running.
I did not even stop at my own little shack. It was only four miles
from there to the huge, rather neglected estate, built in boom times
by some newly-rich promoter, and dubbed by Mercer "The Monstrosity."
Hardly bothering to slow down, I turned off the concrete onto the
long, weed-grown gravel drive, and shot between the two massive,
stuccoed pillars that guarded the drive. Their corroded bronze plates,
bearing the original title of the estate, "The Billows," were a
promise that my long, hard drive was nearly at an end.
  *  *  *  *  *
As soon as the huge, rambling structure was fairly in sight, I pressed
the flat of my hand on the horn button. By the time I came to a
locked-wheel halt, with the gravel rattling on my fenders, Mercer was
there to greet me.
"It's ten o'clock," he grinned as he shook hands. "I'd set noon as the
hour of your arrival. You certainly must have made time, Taylor!"
"I did!" I nodded rather grimly, recalling one or two narrow squeaks.
"But who wouldn't, with a wire like this?" I produced the crumpled
telegram rather dramatically. "You've got a lot to explain."
"I know it." Mercer was quite serious now. "Come on in and we'll mix
highballs with the story."
Locked arm in arm, we entered the house together, and settled
ourselves in the huge living room.
Mercer, I could see at a glance, was thinner and browner than when we
had parted, but otherwise, he was the same lithe, soft-mannered little
scientist I had known for years; dark-eyed, with an almost beautiful
mouth, outlined by a slim, closely cropped and very black moustache.
"Well, here's to our lady from the sea," proposed Mercer, when Carson,
his man, had brought the drinks and departed. I nodded, and we both
sipped our highballs.
"Briefly," said my friend, "this is the story. You and I know that
somewhere beneath the Atlantic there are a people who went back to
whence they came. We have seen one of those people. I propose that,
since they cannot come to us, we go to them. I have made preparations
to go to them, and I wanted you to have the opportunity of going with
me, if you wish."
"But how, Mercer? And what--"
  *  *  *  *  *
He interrupted with a quick, nervous gesture.
"I'll show you, presently. I believe it can be done. It will be a
dangerous adventure, though; I was not joking when I advised you to
make your will. An uncertain venture, too. But, I believe, most
wonderfully worth while." His eyes were shining now with all the
enthusiasm of the scientist, the dreamer.
"It sounds mighty appealing," I said. "But how...."
"Finish your drink and I'll show you."
I downed what was left of my highball in two mighty gulps.
"Lead me to it, Mercer!"
He smiled his quiet smile and led the way to what had been the
billiard room of "The Billows," but which was the laboratory of "The
Monstrosity." The first thing my eyes fell upon were two gleaming
metal objects suspended from chains let into the ceiling.
"Diving suits," explained Mercer. "Rather different from anything
you've ever seen."
They were different. The body was a perfect globe, as was the
head-piece. The legs were cylindrical, jointed at knee and thigh with
huge discs. The feet were solid metal, curved rocker-like on the
bottom, and at the ends of the arms were three hooked talons, the
concave sides of two talons facing the concave side of the third. The
arms were hinged at the elbow just as the legs were hinged, but there
was a huge ball-and-socket joint at the shoulder.
  *  *  *  *  *
"But Mercer!" I protested. "No human being could even stand up with
that weight of metal on and around him!"
"You're mistaken, Taylor," smiled Mercer. "That is not solid metal,
you see. And it is an aluminum alloy that is not nearly as heavy as it
looks. There are two walls, slightly over an inch apart, braced by
innumerable trusses. The fabric is nearly as strong as that much solid
metal, and infinitely lighter. They work all right, Taylor. I know,
because I've tried them."
"And this hump on the back?" I asked, walking around the odd, dangling
figures, hanging like bloated metal skeletons from their chains. I
had thought the bodies were perfect globes; I could see now that at
the rear there was a humplike excrescence across the shoulders.
"Air," explained Mercer. "There are two other tanks inside the
globular body. That shape was adopted, by the way, because a globe can
withstand more pressure than any other shape. And we may have to go
where pressures are high."
"And so," I said, "we don these things and stroll out into the
Atlantic looking for the girl and her friends?"
"Hardly. They're not quite the apparel for so long a stroll. You
haven't seen all the marvels yet. Come along!"
  *  *  *  *  *
He led the way through the patio, beside the pool in which our strange
visitor from the depths had lived during her brief stay with us, and
out into the open again. As we neared the sea, I became aware, for the
first time, of a faint, muffled hammering sound, and I glanced at
Mercer inquiringly.
"Just a second," he smiled. "Then--there she is, Taylor!"
I stood still and stared. In a little cove, cradled in a cunning,
spidery structure of wood, a submarine rested upon the ways.
"Good Lord!" I exclaimed. "You're going into this right, Mercer!"
"Yes. Because I think it's immensely worth while. But come along and
let me show you the _Santa Maria_--named after the flagship of
Columbus' little fleet. Come on!"
Two men with army automatics strapped significantly to their belts
nodded courteously as we came up. They were the only men in sight, but
from the hammering going on inside there must have been quite a
sizeable crew busy in the interior. A couple of raw pine shacks, some
little distance away, provided quarters for, I judged, twenty or
thirty men.
"Had her shipped down in pieces," explained Mercer. "The boat that
brought it lay to off shore and we lightered the parts ashore. A
tremendous job. But she'll be ready for the water in a week; ten days
at the latest."
"You're a wonder," I said, and I meant it.
  *  *  *  *  *
Mercer patted the red-leaded side of the submarine affectionately.
"Later," he said, "I'll take you inside, but they're busy as the devil
in there, and the sound of the hammers fairly makes your head ring.
You'll see it all later, anyway--if you feel you'd like to share the
adventure with me?"
"Listen," I grinned as we turned back towards the house, "it'll take
more than those two lads with the pop-guns to keep me out of the
_Santa Maria_ when she sails--or dives, or whatever it is she's
supposed to do!"
Mercer laughed softly, and we walked the rest of the way in silence. I
imagine we were both pretty busy with our thoughts; I know that I was.
And several times, as we walked along, I looked back over my shoulder
towards the ungainly red monster straddling on her spindling wooden
legs--and towards the smiling Atlantic, glistening serenely in the
sun.
  *  *  *  *  *
Mercer was so busy with a thousand and one details that I found myself
very much in the way if I followed him around, so I decided to loaf.
For weeks after we had put our strange girl visitor back into the sea
from whence Mercer had taken her, I had watched from a comfortable
seat well above the high-water mark that commanded that section of
shore. For I had felt sure by that last strange gesture of hers that
she meant to return.
I located my old seat, and I found that it had been used a great deal
since I had left it. There were whole winnows of cigarette butts, some
of them quite fresh, all around. Mercer, cold-blooded scientist as he
was, had hoped against hope that she would return too.
It was a very comfortable seat, in the shade of a little cluster of
palms, and for the next several days I spent most of my time there,
reading and smoking--and watching. No matter how interesting the book,
I found myself, every few seconds, lifting my eyes to search the beach
and the sea.
I am not sure, but I think it was the eighth day after my arrival that
I looked up and saw, for the first time, something besides the smiling
beach and the ceaseless procession of incoming rollers. For an instant
I doubted what I saw; then, with a cry that stuck in my throat, I
dropped my book unheeded to the sand and raced towards the shore.
  *  *  *  *  *
She was there! White and slim, her pale gold hair clinging to her body
and gleaming like polished metal in the sun, she stood for a moment,
while the spray frothed at her thighs. Behind her, crouching below the
surface, I could distinguish two other forms. She had returned, and
not alone!
One long, slim arm shot out toward me, held level with the shoulder:
the well-remembered gesture of greeting. Then she too crouched below
the surface that she might breathe.
As I ran out onto the wet sand, the waves splashing around my ankles
all unheeded, she rose again, and now I could see her lovely smile,
and her dark, glowing eyes. I was babbling--I do not know what. Before
I could reach her, she smiled and sank again below the surface.
I waded on out, laughing excitedly, and as I came close to her, she
bobbed up again out of the spray, and we greeted each other in the
manner of her people, hands outstretched, each gripping the shoulder
of the other.
She made a quick motion then, with both hands, as though she placed a
cap upon the shining glory of her head, and I understood in an instant
what she wished: the antenna of Mercer's thought-telegraph, by the
aid of which she had told us the story of herself and her people.
  *  *  *  *  *
I nodded and smiled, and pointed to the spot where she stood, trying
to show her by my expression that I understood, and by my gesture,
that she was to wait here for me. She smiled and nodded in return, and
crouched again below the surface of the heaving sea.
As I turned toward the beach, I caught a momentary glimpse of the two
who had come with her. They were a man and a woman, watching me with
wide, half-curious, half-frightened eyes. I recognized them instantly
from the picture she had impressed upon my mind nearly a year ago. She
had brought with her on her journey her mother and her father.
Stumbling, my legs shaking with excitement, I ran through the water.
With my wet trousers flapping against my ankles, I sprinted towards
the house.
I found Mercer in the laboratory. He looked up as I came rushing in,
wet from the shoulders down, and I saw his eyes grow suddenly wide.
  *  *  *  *  *
I opened my mouth to speak, but I was breathless. And Mercer took the
words from my mouth before I could utter them.
"She's come back!" he cried. "She's come back! Taylor--she has?" He
gripped me, his fingers like steel clamps, shaking me with his amazing
strength.
"Yes." I found my breath and my voice at the same instant. "She's
there, just where we put her into the sea, and there are two others
with her--her mother and her father. Come on, Mercer, and bring your
thought gadget!"
"I can't!" he groaned. "I've built an improvement on it into the
diving armor, and a central instrument on the sub, but the old
apparatus is strewn all over the table, here, just as it was when we
used it the other time. We'll have to bring her here."
"Get a basin, then!" I said. "We'll carry her back to the pool just as
we took her from it. Hurry!"
And we did just that. Mercer snatched up a huge glass basin used in
his chemistry experiments, and we raced down to the shore. As well as
we could we explained our wishes, and she smiled her quick smile of
understanding. Crouching beneath the water, she turned to her
companions, and I could see her throat move as she spoke to them. They
seemed to protest, dubious and frightened, but in the end she seemed
to reassure them, and we picked her up, swathed in her hair as in a
silken gown, and carried her, her head immersed in the basin of water,
that she might breathe in comfort, to the pool.
It all took but a few minutes, but it seemed hours. Mercer's hands
were shaking as he handed me the antenna for the girl and another for
myself, and his teeth were chattering as he spoke.
"Hurry, Taylor!" he said. "I've set the switch so that she can do the
sending, while we receive. Quickly, man!"
  *  *  *  *  *
I leaped into the pool and adjusted the antenna on her head, making
sure that the four electrodes of the crossed curved members pressed
against the front and back and both sides of her head. Then, hastily,
I climbed out of the pool, seated myself on its edge, and put on my
own antenna.
Perhaps I should say at this time that Mercer's device for conveying
thought could do no more than convey what was in the mind of the
person sending. Mercer and I could convey actual words and sentences,
because we understood each other's language, and by thinking in words,
we conveyed our thoughts in words. One received the impression,
almost, of having heard actual speech.
We could not communicate with the girl in this fashion, however, for
we did not understand her speech. She had to convey her thoughts to
us by means of mental pictures which told her story. And this is the
story of her pictures unfolded.
First, in sketchy, half-formed pictures, I saw her return to the
village, of her people; her welcome there, with curious crowds around
her, questioning her. Their incredulous expressions as she told them
of her experience were ludicrous. Her meeting with her father and
mother brought a little catch to my throat, and I looked across the
pool at Mercer. I knew that he, too, was glad that we bad put her back
into the sea when she wished to go.
  *  *  *  *  *
These pictures faded hastily, and for a moment there was only the
circular swirling as of gray mist; that was the symbol she adopted to
denote the passing of time. Then, slowly, the picture cleared.
It was the same village I had seen before, with its ragged, warped,
narrow streets, and its row of dome-shaped houses, for all the world
like Eskimo igloos, but made of coral and various forms of vegetation.
At the outskirts of the village I could see the gently moving, shadowy
forms of weird submarine growths, and the quick darting shapes of
innumerable fishes.
Some few people were moving along the streets, walking with oddly
springy steps. Others, a larger number, darted here and there above
the roofs, some hovering in the water as gulls hover in the air,
lazily, but the majority apparently on business or work to be executed
with dispatch.
Suddenly, into the midst of this peaceful scene, three figures came
darting. They were not like the people of the village, for they were
smaller, and instead of being gracefully slim they were short and
powerful in build. They were not white like the people of the girl's
village, but swarthy, and they were dressed in a sort of tight-fitting
shirt of gleaming leather--shark-skin, I learned later. They carried,
tucked through a sort of belt made of twisted vegetation, two long,
slim knives of pointed stone or bone.
  *  *  *  *  *
But it was not until they seemed to come close to me that I saw the
great point of difference. Their faces were scarcely human. The nose
had become rudimentary, leaving a large, blank expanse in the middle
of their faces that gave them a peculiarly hideous expression. Their
eyes were almost perfectly round, and very fierce, and their mouths
huge and fishlike. Beneath their sharp, jutting jaws, between the
angle of the jaws and a spot beneath the ears, were huge, longitudinal
slits, that intermittently showed blood-red, like fresh gashes cut in
the sides of their throats. I could see even the hard, bony cover that
protected these slits, and I realized that these were gills! Here were
representatives of a people that had gone back to the sea ages before
the people of the girl's village.
Their coming caused a sort of panic in the village, and the three
noseless creatures strode down the principal street grinning hugely,
glancing from right to left, and showing their sharp pointed teeth.
They looked more like sharks than like human beings.
A committee of five gray old men met the visitors, and conducted them
into one of the larger houses. Insolently, the leader of the three
shark-faced creatures made demands, and the scene changed swiftly to
make clear the nature of those demands.
  *  *  *  *  *
The village was to give a number of its finest young men and women to
the shark-faced people; about fifty of each sex, I gathered, to be
servants, slaves, to the noseless ones.
The scene shifted quickly to the interior of the house. The old men
were shaking their heads, protesting, explaining. There was fear on
their faces, but there was determination, too.
One of the three envoys snarled and came closer to the five old men,
lifting a knife threateningly. I thought for an instant that he was
about to strike down one of the villagers; then the picture dissolved
into another, and I saw that he was but threatening them with what he
could cause to happen.
The fate of the village and the villagers, were the demands of the
three refused, was a terrible one. Hordes of the noseless creatures
came swarming. They tore the houses apart, and with their long, slim
white weapons they killed the old men and women, and the children. The
villagers fought desperately, but they were outnumbered. The
shark-skin kirtles of the invaders turned their knives like armor, and
the sea grew red with swirling blood that spread like scarlet smoke
through the water. Then, this too faded, and I saw the old men
cowering, pleading with the three terrible envoys.
The leader of the three shark-faced creatures spoke again. He would
give them time--a short revolving swirl of gray that indicated only a
brief time, apparently--and return for an answer. Grinning evilly, the
three turned away, left the dome-shaped house, and darted away over
the roofs of the village into the dim darkness of the distant waters.
  *  *  *  *  *
I saw the girl, then, talking to the elders. They smiled sadly, and
shook their heads hopelessly. She argued with them earnestly, painting
a picture for them: Mercer and myself, as she viewed us, tall and very
strong and with great wisdom in our faces. We too walked along the
streets of the village. The hordes of shark-faced ones came, like a
swarm of monstrous sharks, and--the picture was very vague and
nebulous, now--we put them to rout.
She wished us to help her, she had convinced the elders that we could.
She, her mother and father, started out from the village. Three times
they had fought with sharks, and each time they had killed them. They
had found the shore, the very spot where we had put her back into the
sea. Then there was a momentary flash of the picture she had called
up, of Mercer and I putting the shark-faced hordes to rout, and then,
startlingly, I was conscious of that high, pleading sound--the sound
that I had heard once before, when she had begged us to return her to
her people.
The sound that I knew was her word for "_Please!_"
There was a little click. Mercer had turned the switch. He would
transmit now; she and I would listen.
  *  *  *  *  *
In the center of the village--how vaguely and clumsily he pictured
it!--rested the _Santa Maria_. From a trap in the bottom two bulging,
gleaming figures emerged. Rushing up, a glimpse through the
face-plates revealed Mercer and myself. The shark-faced hordes
descended, and Mercer waved something, something like a huge bottle,
towards them. None of the villagers were in sight.
The noseless ones swooped down on us fearlessly, knives drawn, pointed
teeth revealed in fiendish grins. But they did not reach us. By
dozens, by scores, they went limp and floated slowly to the floor of
the ocean. Their bodies covered the streets, they sprawled across the
roofs of the houses. And in a few seconds there was not one alive of
all the hundreds who had come!
I looked down at the girl. She was smiling up at me through the clear
water, and once again I felt the strange, strong tug at my
heart-strings. Her great dark eyes glowed with a perfect confidence, a
supreme faith.
We had made her a promise.
I wondered if it would be possible to keep it.
  *  *  *  *  *
In the day following, the _Santa Maria_ was launched. Two days later,
trial trips and final adjustments completed, we submerged for the
great adventure.
It sounds very simple when recorded thus in a few brief lines. It was
not, however, such a simple matter. Those three days were full of
hectic activity. Mercer and I did not sleep more than four hours any
of those three nights.
We were too busy to talk. Mercer worked frantically in his laboratory,
slaving feverishly beside the big hood. I overlooked the tests of the
submarine and the loading of the necessary supplies.
The girl we had taken back to her parents, giving her to understand
that she was to wait. They went away, but every few hours returned, as
though to urge us to greater haste. And at last we were ready, and the
girl and her two companions seated themselves on the tiny deck of the
_Santa Maria_, just forward of the conning tower, holding themselves
in place by the chains. We had already instructed the girl in her
duties: we would move slowly, and she should guide us, by pointing
either to the right or the left.
  *  *  *  *  *
I will confess I gave a last long, lingering look at the shore before
the hatch of the conning tower was clamped down. I was not exactly
afraid, but I wondered if I would ever step foot on solid land again.
Standing in the conning tower beside Mercer, I watched the sea rise at
an angle to meet us, and I dodged instinctively as the first green
wave pelted against the thick porthole through which I was looking. An
instant later the water closed over the top of the conning tower, and
at a gentle angle we nosed towards the bottom of the sea.
An account of the trip itself, perhaps, does not belong in this
record. It was not a pleasant adventure in itself, for the _Santa
Maria_, like every undersea craft, I suppose, was close, smelly, and
cramped. We proceeded very slowly, for only by so doing could our
guide keep her bearings, and how she found the way was a mystery to
all of us. We could see but very little, despite the clearness of the
water.
It was by no means a sight-seeing trip. For various reasons, Mercer
had cut our crew to the minimum. We had two navigating officers,
experienced submarine men both, and five sailors, also experienced in
undersea work. With such a short crew, Mercer and I were both kept
busy.
  *  *  *  *  *
Bonnett, the captain, was a tall, dark chap, stooped from years in the
low, cramped quarters of submarines. Duke, our second-officer, was a
youngster hardly out of his 'teens, and as clever as they come. And
although both of them, and the crew as well, must have been agog with
questions, neither by word nor look did they express their feelings.
Mercer had paid for obedience without curiosity, and he got it.
We spent the first night on the bottom, for the simple reason that had
we come to the surface, we might have come down into territory
unfamiliar to our guide. As soon as the first faint light began to
filter down, however, we proceeded, and Mercer and I crowded together
into the conning tower.
"We're close," said Mercer. "See how excited they are, all three of
them."
The three strange creatures were holding onto the chains and staring
over the bulging side of the ship. Every few seconds the girl turned
and looked back at us, smiling, her eyes shining with excitement.
Suddenly she pointed straight down, and held out her arm in
unmistakable gesture. We were to stop.
  *  *  *  *  *
Mercer conveyed the order instantly to Bonnett at the controls, and
all three of our guides dived gracefully off the ship and disappeared
into the depths below.
"Let her settle to the bottom, Bonnett," ordered Mercer. "Slowly ...
slowly...."
Bonnett handled the ship neatly, keeping her nicely trimmed. We came
to rest on the bottom in four or five seconds, and as Mercer and I
stared out eagerly through the round glass ports of the conning
tower, we could see, very dimly, a cluster of dark, rounded
projections cropping out from the bed of the ocean. We were only a few
yards from the edge of the girl's village.
The scene was exactly as we had pictured it, save that it was not
nearly as clear and well lighted. I realized that our eyes were not
accustomed to the gloom, as were those of the girl and her people, but
I could distinguish the vague outlines of the houses, and the slowly
swaying shapes of monstrous growths.
"Well, Taylor," said Mercer, his voice shaking with excitement, "here
we are! And here"--peering out through the glass-covered port
again--"are her people!"
  *  *  *  *  *
The whole village was swarming around us. White bodies hovered around
us as moths around a light. Faces pressed against the ports and stared
in at us with great, amazed eyes.
Then, suddenly the crowd of curious creatures parted, and the girl
came darting up with the five ancients she had showed us before. They
were evidently the council responsible for the government of the
village, or something of the sort, for the other villagers bowed their
heads respectfully as they passed.
The girl came close to the port through which I was looking, and
gestured earnestly. Her face was tense and anxious, and from time to
time she glanced over her shoulder, as though she feared the coming of
an enemy.
"Our time's short, I take it, if we are to be of service," said
Mercer. "Come on, Taylor; into the diving suits!"
I signaled the girl that we understood, and would hurry. Then I
followed Mercer into our tiny stateroom.
"Remember what I've told you," he said, as we slipped into the heavy
woolen undergarments we were to wear inside the suits. "You understand
how to handle your air, I believe, and you'll have no difficulty
getting around in the suit if you'll just remember to go slowly. Your
job is to get the whole village to get away when the enemy is sighted.
Get them to come this way from the village, towards the ship,
understand. The current comes from this direction; the way the
vegetation bends shows that. And keep the girl's people away until I
signal you to let them return. And remember to take your electric
lantern. Don't burn it more than is necessary; the batteries are not
large and the bulb draws a lot of current. Ready?"
  *  *  *  *  *
I was, but I was shaking a little as the men helped me into the mighty
armor that was to keep the pressure of several atmospheres from
crushing my body. The helmet was the last piece to be donned; when it
was screwed in place I stood there like a mummy, almost completely
rigid.
Quickly we were put into the air lock, together with a large iron box
containing a number of things Mercer needed. Darkness and water rushed
in on us. The water closed over my head. I became aware of the soft,
continuous popping sounds of the air-bubbles escaping from the relief
valve of the head-piece.
For a moment I was dizzy and more than a little nauseated. I could
feel the cold sweat pricking my forehead. Then there was a sudden glow
of light from before me, and I started walking towards it. I found I
could walk now; not easily, but, after I caught the trick of it,
without much difficulty. I could move my arms, too, and the
interlocking hooks that served me for fingers. When my real fingers
closed upon a little cross-bar at the end of the armored arms, and
pulled the bars towards me, the steel claws outside came together,
like a thumb and two fingers.
  *  *  *  *  *
In a moment we stood upon the bottom of the ocean. I turned my head
inside the helmet, and there, beside me, was the sleek, smooth side
of the _Santa Maria_. On my other side was Mercer, a huge, dim figure
in his diving armor. He made an awkward gesture towards his head, and
I suddenly remembered something.
Before me, where I could operate it with a thrusting movement of my
chin, was a toggle switch. I snapped it over, and heard Mercer's
voice: "--n't forget everything I tell him."
"I know it," I said mentally to him. "I was rather rattled. O.K. now,
however. Anything I can do?"
"Yes. Help me with this box, and then get the girl to put on the
antenna you'll find there. Don't forget the knife and the light."
"Right!" I bent over the box with him, and we both came near falling.
We opened the lid, however, and I hooked the knife and the light into
their proper places outside my armor. Then, with the antenna for the
girl, so that we could establish connections with her, and through
her, with the villagers, I moved off.
This antenna was entirely different from the one used in previous
experiments. The four cross-members that clasped the head were finer,
and at their junction was a flat black circular box, from which rose a
black rod some six inches in height, and topped by a black sphere half
the size of my fist.
  *  *  *  *  *
These perfected thought-telegraphs (I shall continue to use my own
designation for them, as clearer and more understandable than
Mercer's) did not need connecting wires; they conveyed their impulses
by Hertzian waves to a master receiver on the _Santa Maria_, which
amplified them and re-broadcast them so that each of us could both
send and receive at any time.
As I turned, I found the girl beside me, waiting anxiously. Behind her
were the five ancients. I slipped the antenna over her head, and
instantly she began telling me that danger was imminent.
To facilitate matters, I shall describe her messages as though she
spoke; indeed, her pictures were as clear, almost, as speech in my
native tongue. And at times she did use certain sound-words; it was in
this way that I learned, by inference, that her name was _Imee_, that
her people were called _Teemorn_ (this may have been the name of the
community, or perhaps it was interchangeable--I am not sure) and that
the shark-faced people were the _Rorn_.
"The Rorn come!" she said quickly. "Two days past, the three came
again, and our old men refused to give up the slaves. Today they will
return, these Rorn, and my people, the Teemorn will all be made dead!"
  *  *  *  *  *
Then I told her what Mercer had said: that she and every one of her
people must flee swiftly and hide, beyond the boat, a distance beyond
the village. Mercer and I would wait here, and when the Rorn came, it
was they who would be made dead, as we had promised. Although how, I
admitted to myself, being careful to hide the thought that she might
not sense it, I didn't know. We had been too busy since the girl's
arrival to go into details.
She turned and spoke quickly to the old men. They looked at me
doubtfully, and she urged them vehemently. They turned back towards
the village, and in a moment the Teemorn were stalking by obediently,
losing their slim white forms in the gloom behind the dim bulk of the
_Santa Maria_, resting so quietly on the sand.
They were hardly out of sight when suddenly Mercer spoke through the
antenna fitted inside my helmet.
"They're coming!" he cried. "Look above and to your right! The Rorn,
as Imee calls them, have arrived!"
I looked up and beheld a hundred--no, a thousand!--shadowy forms
darting down on the village, upon us. They, too, were just as the girl
had pictured them: short, swart beings with but the suggestion of a
nose, and with pulsing gill-covers under the angles of their jaws.
Each one gripped a long, slim white knife in either hand, and their
tight-fitting shark-skin armor gleamed darkly as they swooped down
upon us.
  *  *  *  *  *
Eagerly I watched my friend. In the clasping talons of his left hand
he held a long, slim flask that glinted even in that dim, confusing
twilight. Two others, mates to the first, dangled at his waist.
Lifting it high above his head, he swung his metal-clad right arm, and
shattered the flask he held in his taloned left hand.
For an instant nothing happened, save that flittering bits of broken
glass shimmered their way to the sand. Then the horde of noseless ones
seemed to dissolve, as hundreds of limp and sprawling bodies sank to
the sand. Perhaps a half of that great multitude seemed struck dead.
"Hydrocyanic acid, Taylor!" cried Mercer exultantly. "Even diluted by
the sea water, it kills almost instantly. Go back and make sure that
none of the girl's people come back before the current has washed this
away, or they'll go in the same fashion. Warn her to keep them back!"
  *  *  *  *  *
I hurried toward the _Santa Maria_, thinking urgent warnings for
Imee's benefit. "Stay back! Stay back, Imee! The Rorn are falling to
the sand, we have made many of them dead, but the danger for you and
your people is still here. Stay back!"
"Truly, do the Rorn become dead? I would like to see that with my own
eyes. Be careful that they do not make you dead also, and your friend,
for they have large brains, these Rorn."
"Do not come to see with your own eyes, or you will be as the Rorn!" I
hurried around the submarine, to keep her back by force, if that were
necessary. "You must--"
"Help, Taylor!" cut in a voice--Mercer's. "These devils have got me!"
"Right with you!" I turned and hurried back as swiftly as I could,
stumbling over the bodies of dead Rorn that had settled everywhere on
the clean yellow sand.
I found Mercer in the grip of six of the shark-faced creatures. They
were trying desperately to stab him, but their knives bent and broke
against the metal of his armor. So busy were they with him that they
did not notice me coming up, but finding their weapons useless, they
suddenly snatched him up, one at either arm and either leg, and two
grasping him by the head-piece, and darted away with him, carrying his
bulging metal body between them like a battering ram, while he kicked
and struggled impotently.
"They are taking him to the Place of Darkness!" cried Imee suddenly,
having read my impressions of the scene. "Oh, go quickly, quickly,
toward the direction of your best hand--to your right! I shall
follow!"
"No! No! Stay back!" I warned her frantically. All but these six Rorn
had fallen victims of Mercer's hellish poison, and while they seemed
to be suffering no ill effects, I thought it more than likely that
some sly current might bring the deadly poison to the girl, did she
come this way, and kill her as surely as it had killed these hundreds
of Rorn.
  *  *  *  *  *
To the right, she had said. Towards the Place of Darkness. I hurried
out of the village in the direction she indicated, towards the distant
gleam of Mercer's armor, rapidly being lost in the gloom.
"I'm coming, Mercer!" I called to him. "Delay them as much as you can.
You're going faster than I can."
"I can't help myself much," replied Mercer. "Doing what I can.
Strong--they're devilish strong, Taylor. And, at close range, I can
see you were right. They have true gill-covers; their noses are
rudimentary and--"
"The devil take your scientific observations! Drag! Slow them down.
I'm losing sight of you. For heaven's sake, drag!"
"I'm doing what I can. Damn you, if I could only get a hand free--" I
realized that this last was directed at his captors, and plunged on.
  *  *  *  *  *
Huge, monstrous growths swirled around me like living things. My feet
crunched on shelled things, and sank into soft and slimy creeping
things on the bottom. I cursed the water that held me back so gently
yet so firmly; I cursed the armor that made it so hard for me to move
my legs. But I kept on, and at last I began to gain on them; I could
see them quite distinctly, bending over Mercer, working on him....
"Do your best, Taylor," urged Mercer desperately. "We're on the edge
of a sort of cliff; a fault in the structure of the ocean bed. They're
tying me with strong cords of leather. Tying a huge stone to my body.
I think they--" I had a momentary flash of the scene as Mercer saw it
at that instant: the horrid noseless face close to his, the swart
bodies moving with amazing agility. And at his very feet, a yawning
precipice, holding nothing but darkness, leading down and down into
nothingness.
"Run quickly!" It was Imee. She, too, had seen what I had seen. "That
is the Place of Darkness, where we take those whom the Five deem
worthy of the Last Punishment. They will tie the stone to him, and
bear him out above the Blackness, and then they will let him go!
Quickly! Quickly!"
I was almost upon them now, and one of the six turned and saw me.
Three of them darted towards me, while the others held Mercer flat
upon the edge of the precipice. If they had only realized that by
rolling his armored body a foot or two, he would sink ... without the
stone.... But they did not. Their brains had little reasoning power,
apparently. The attaching of a stone was necessary, in their
experience; it was necessary now.
  *  *  *  *  *
With my left hand I unhooked my light; I already gripped my knife in
my right hand. Swinging the light sharply against my leg, I struck the
toggle-switch, and a beam of intense brilliancy shot through the
gloom. It aided me, as I had thought it would; it blinded these
large-eyed denizens of the deep.
Swiftly I struck out with the knife. It hacked harmlessly into the
shark-skin garment of one of the men, and I stabbed out again. Two of
the men leaped for my right arm, but the knife found, this time, the
throat of the third. My beam of light showed palely red, for a moment,
and the body of the Rorn toppled slowly to the bed of the ocean.
The two shark-faced creatures were hammering at me with their fists,
dragging at my arms and legs, but I plunged on desperately towards
Mercer. Myriads of fish, all shapes and colors and sizes, attracted by
the light, swarmed around us.
"Good boy!" Mercer commended. "See if you can break this last flask of
acid, here at my waist. See--"
  *  *  *  *  *
With a last desperate plunge, fairly dragging the two Rorn who tugged
at me, I fell forward. With the clenched steel talons of my right
hand, I struck at the silvery flask I could see dangling from Mercer's
waist. I hit it, but only a glancing blow; the flask did not shatter.
"Again!" commanded Mercer. "It's heavy annealed glass--hydrocyanic
acid--terrible stuff--even the fumes--"
I paid but slight heed. The two Rorn dragged me back, but I managed to
crawl forward on my knees, and with all my strength, I struck at the
flask again.
This time it shattered, and I lay where I fell, sobbing with weakness,
looking out through the side window of my head-piece.
The five Rorn seemed to suddenly lose their strength. They struggled
limply for a moment, and then floated down to the waiting sand
beneath us.
"Finish," remarked Mercer coolly. "And just in time. Let's see if we
can find our way back to the _Santa Maria_."
  *  *  *  *  *
We were weary, and we plodded along slowly, twin trails of air-bubbles
like plumes waving behind us, rushing upwards to the surface. I felt
strangely alone at the moment, isolated, cut off from all mankind, on
the bottom of the Atlantic.
"Coming to meet you, all of us," Imee signaled us. "Be careful where
you step, so that you do not walk in a circle and find again the Place
of Darkness. It is very large."
"Probably some uncharted deep," threw in Mercer. "Only the larger ones
have been located."
For my part, I was too weary to think. I just staggered on.
A crowd of slim, darting white shapes surrounded us. They swam before
us, showing the way. The five patriarchs walked majestically before
us; and between us, smiling at us through the thick lenses of our
headpieces, walked Imee. Oh, it was a triumphal procession, and had I
been less weary, I presume I would have felt quite the hero.
  *  *  *  *  *
Imee pictured for us, as we went along, the happiness, the
gratefulness of her people. Already, she informed us, great numbers of
young men were clearing away the bodies of the dead Rorn. She was so
happy she could hardly restrain herself.
A dim skeleton shape bulked up at my left. I turned to look at it, and
Imee, watching me through the lights of my head-piece, nodded and
smiled.
Yes, this was the very hulk by which she had been swimming when the
shark had attacked her, the shark which had been the cause of the
accident. She darted on to show me the very rib upon which her head
had struck, stunning her so that she had drifted, unconscious and
storm-tossed, to the shore of Mercer's estate.
I studied the wreck. It was battered and tilted on its beam ends, but
I could still make out the high poop that marked it as a very old
ship.
"A Spanish galleon, Mercer," I conjectured.
"I believe so." And then, in pictured form, for Imee's benefit, "It
has been here while much time passed?"
"Yes." Imee came darting back to us, smiling. "Since before the
Teemorn, my people were here. A Rorn we made prisoner once told us his
people discovered it first. They went into this strange skeleton, and
inside were many blocks of very bright stone." She pictured quite
clearly bars of dully-glinting bullion. Evidently the captive had told
his story well.
  *  *  *  *  *
"These stones, which were so bright, the Rorn took to their city,
which is three swims distant." How far that might be, I could not even
guess. A swim, it seemed, was the distance a Teemorn could travel
before the need for rest became imperative. "There were many Rorn, and
they each took one stone. And of them, they made a house for their
leader." The leader, as she pictured him, being the most hideous
travesty of a thing in semi-human form that the mind could imagine:
incredibly old and wrinkled and ugly and gray, his noseless face
seamed with cunning, his eyes red rimmed and terrible, his teeth
gleaming, white and sharp, like fangs.
"A whole house, except the roof," she went on. "It is there now, and
it is gazed at with much admiration by all the Rorn. All this our
prisoner told us before we took him, with a rock made fast to him, out
over the Place of Darkness. He, too, was very proud of their leader's
house."
"Treasure!" I commented to Mercer. "If we could find the city of the
Rorn, we might make the trip pay for itself!"
I could sense his wave of amusement.
"I think," he replied, "I'd rather stand it myself. These Rorn don't
appeal to me."
It was over half an hour before we were at last free of our diving
suits.
The first thing Captain Bonnett said:
"We've got to get to the surface, and that quickly. Our air supply is
running damnably low. By the time we blow out the tanks we'll be just
about out. And foul air will keep us here until we rot. I'm sorry,
sir, but that's the way matters stand."
  *  *  *  *  *
Mercer, white-faced and ill, stared at him dazedly.
"Air?" he repeated groggily--I knew just how he felt--"We should have
lots of air. The specifications--"
"But we're dealing with facts, not specifications, sir," said Captain
Bonnett. "Another two hours here and we won't leave ever."
"Then it can't be helped, Captain," muttered Mercer. "We'll go up. And
back. For more compressed air. We must remember to plot our course
exactly. You kept the record on the way out as I instructed you?"
"Yes, sir," said Captain Bonnett.
"Just a minute, then," said Mercer.
Weakly he made his way forward to the little cubbyhole in which was
housed the central station of his thought-telegraph. I didn't even
inspect the gleaming maze of apparatus. I merely watched him dully as
he plugged in an antenna similar to the one we had left with Imee, and
adjusted the things on his head.
  *  *  *  *  *
His eyes brightened instantly. "She's still wearing her antenna," he
said swiftly over his shoulder. "I'll tell her that something's
happened; we must leave, but that we will return."
He sat there, frowning intently for a moment, and then dragged the
antenna wearily from his head. He touched a switch somewhere, and
several softly glowing bulbs turned slowly red and then dark.
"You and I," he groaned, "had better go to bed. We overdid it. She
understands, I think. Terribly sorry, terribly disappointed. Some
sort of celebration planned, I gather. Captain Bonnett!"
"Yes, sir?"
"You may proceed now as you think best," said Mercer. "We're retiring.
Be sure and chart the course back, so we may locate this spot again."
"Yes, sir!" said Captain Bonnett.
  *  *  *  *  *
When I awoke we were at anchor, our deck barely awash, before the
deserted beach of Mercer's estate. Still feeling none too well, Mercer
and I made our way to the narrow deck.
Captain Bonnett was waiting for us, spruce in his blue uniform, his
shoulders bowed as always.
"Good morning, gentlemen," he offered, smiling crisply. "The open air
seems good, doesn't it?"
It did. There was a fresh breeze blowing in from the Atlantic, and I
filled my lungs gratefully. I had not realized until that instant just
how foul the air below had been.
"Very fine, Captain," said Mercer, nodding. "You have signaled the men
on shore to send out a boat to take us off?"
"Yes, sir; I believe they're launching her now."
"And the chart of our course--did the return trip check with the
other?"
"Perfectly, sir." Captain Bonnett reached in an inner pocket of his
double-breasted coat, extracted two folded pages, and extended them,
with a little bow, to Mercer.
Just as Mercer's eager fingers touched the precious papers, however,
the wind whisked them from Bonnett's grasp and whirled them into the
water.
Bonnett gasped and gazed after them for a split second; then, barely
pausing to tear off his coat, he plunged over the side.
  *  *  *  *  *
He tried desperately, but before he could reach either one of the
tossing white specks, they were washed beneath the surface and
disappeared. Ten minutes later, his uniform bedraggled and shapeless,
he pulled himself on deck.
"I'm sorry, sir," he gasped, out of breath. "Sorrier than I can say. I
tried--"
Mercer, white-faced and struggling with his emotions, looked down and
turned away.
"You don't remember the bearings, I suppose?" he ventured tonelessly.
"I'm sorry--no."
"Thank you, Captain, for trying so hard to recover the papers," said
Mercer. "You'd better change at once; the wind is sharp."
  *  *  *  *  *
The captain bowed and disappeared down the conning tower. Then Mercer
turned to me, and a smile struggled for life.
"Well, Taylor, we helped her out, anyway," he said slowly. "I'm sorry
that--that Imee will misunderstand when we don't come back."
"But, Mercer," I said swiftly, "perhaps we'll be able to find our way
back to her. You thought before, you know, that--"
"But I can see now what an utterly wild-goose chase it would have
been." Mercer shook his head slowly. "No, old friend, it would be
impossible. And--Imee will not come again to guide us; she will think
we have deserted her. And"--he smiled slowly up into my eyes--"perhaps
it is as well. After all, the photographs and the data I wanted would
do the world no practical good. We did Imee and her people a good
turn; let's content ourselves with that. I, for one, am satisfied."
"And I, old timer," I said, placing my hand affectionately upon his
shoulder. "Here's the boat. Shall we go ashore?"
We did go ashore, silently. And as we got out of the boat, and set
foot again upon the sand, we both turned and looked out across the
smiling Atlantic, dancing brightly in the sun.
The mighty, mysterious Atlantic--home of Imee and her people!
Murder Madness
BEGINNING A FOUR-PART NOVEL
_By Murray Leinster_
[Illustration: _The heads leveled the revolver in spite of him, while
he flung his head from side to side in a frantic attempt to disturb
their aim._]
[Sidenote: Murder Madness! Seven Secret Service men had completely
disappeared. Another had been found a screaming, homicidal maniac,
whose fingers writhed like snakes. So Bell, of the secret "Trade,"
plunges into South America after The Master--the mighty, unknown
octopus of power whose diabolical poison threatens a continent!]
CHAPTER I
The engines of the _Almirante Gomez_ were going dead slow. Away up
beside her monster funnels her siren blew dismally, _Whoo-oo-oo-oo!_
and was silent for the regulation period, and blew desolately again
into the clinging gray mist that ringed her all about.
Her decks were wet and glistening. Droplets of water stood upon the
deck-stanchions, and dripped from the outer edge of the roof above the
promenade deck. A thin, swirling fog lay soggily upon the water and
the big steamer went dead slow upon her course, sending dismal and
depressing blasts from her horn from time to time. It was barely
possible to see from one side of the ship to the other. It was surely
impossible to see the bow from a point half astern.
Charley Bell went forward along the promenade deck. He passed Senor
Ortiz, ex-Minister of the Interior of the Argentine Republic. Ortiz
bowed to him punctiliously, but Bell had a sudden impression that the
Argentine's face was gray and ghastly. He checked himself and looked
back. The little man was climbing the companion-ladder toward the
wireless room.
  *  *  *  *  *
Bell slipped on toward the bow. He did not want to give an impression
of furtiveness, but the _Almirante Gomez_ was twelve days out of New
York and Bell was still entirely ignorant of why he was on board. He
had been called into the office of his chief in the State Department
and told curtly that his request for leave of absence had been
granted. And Bell had not asked for a leave of absence. But at just
that moment he saw a rubber band on the desk of his immediate
superior, a fairly thick rubber band which had been tied into a
certain intricate knot. And Bell had kept quiet. He went to his
apartment, found his bags packed and tickets to Rio via the _Almirante
Gomez_ in an envelope on his dressing-table, and went out and caught a
train to the ship.
[Illustration]
And that was all he knew. The siren up above blared dolefully into the
fog. It was damp, and soggy, and depressing. The other passengers were
under cover, and the decks seemed to be deserted. From the saloon came
the sound of music. Bell pulled the collar of his light topcoat about
his throat and strolled on toward the bow.
He faced a row of steamer chairs. There was a figure curled up in one
of them. Paula Canalejas, muffled up against the dampness and staring
somberly out into the mist. Bell had met her in Washington and liked
her a great deal, but he swore softly at sight of her in his way.
The afternoon before, he had seen a stoker on the _Almirante Gomez_
pick up a bit of rope and absently tie knots in it while he exchanged
Rabelasian humor with his fellows. He had not looked at Bell at all,
but the knots he tied were the same that Bell had last seen tied in a
rubber band on a desk in the State Department in Washington. And Bell
knew a recognition signal when he saw one. The stoker would be off
watch, just now, and by all the rules of reason he ought to be out
there on the forecastle, waiting for Bell to turn up and receive
instructions.
  *  *  *  *  *
But Bell paused, lit a cigarette carefully, and strolled forward.
"Mr. Bell."
He stopped and beamed fatuously at her. It would have been logical for
him to fall in love with her, and it is always desirable to seem
logical. He had striven painstakingly to give the impression that he
had fallen in love with her--and then had striven even more
painstakingly to keep from doing it.
"Hullo," he said in bland surprise. "What are you doing out on deck?"
Brown eyes regarded him speculatively.
"Thinking," she said succinctly. "About you, Mr. Bell."
Bell beamed.
"Thinking," he confided, "is usually a bad habit, especially in a
girl. But if you must think, I approve of your choice of subjects.
What were you thinking about me?"
The brown eyes regarded him still more speculatively.
"I was wondering--" said Paula, glancing to either side, "I was
wondering if you happen to be--er--a member of the United States
Secret Service."
Bell laughed with entire naturalness.
"Good Lord, no!" he said amusedly. "I have a desk in the State
Department building, and I read consular reports all day long and
write letters bedeviling the consuls for not including unavailable
statistics in their communications. That's my work. I'm on leave now."
  *  *  *  *  *
She looked skeptical and, it may be, disappointed.
"You look as if you didn't believe me," said Bell, smiling. "I give
you my word of honor I'm not a member of the United States Secret
Service. Will that do to relieve your suspicions?"
"I believe you," she said slowly, "but it does not relieve my mind. I
shall think about other people. I have something important to tell a
member of the United States Secret Service."
Bell shrugged.
"I'm sorry," he said amiably, "that I can't oblige you by tipping one
of them off. That's what you wanted me to do, isn't it?"
She nodded, and the gesture was very much like a dismissal. Bell
frowned, hesitated, and went on. He was anxious to meet the stoker,
but this....
The siren droned dismally over his head. Fog lay deep about the ship.
The washing of the waves and dripping of water on the decks was
depressing. It seemed to be getting thicker. Four stanchions ahead,
the mist was noticeable. He found that he could count five, six,
seven.... The eighth was indefinite. But a bar materialized in the fog
before him, and the grayness drew away before him and closed in
behind. When he was at the forward end of the promenade, looking down
upon the forecastle deck, he was isolated. He heard footsteps some
distance overhead. The watch officer up on the bridge. Bell glanced up
and saw him as an indistinct figure. He waited until the officer paced
over to the opposite side of the bridge. The air throbbed and shook
with the roaring of the siren.
Bell slipped over the edge of the rail and swung swiftly down the
little ladder of iron bars set into the ship's structure. In seconds
he had landed, and was down upon that terra incognita of all
passengers, the deck reserved for the use of the crew.
  *  *  *  *  *
A mast loomed overhead, with its heavy, clumsy derrick-booms. A winch
was by his side. Oddments of deck machinery, inexplicable to a
landsman, formed themselves vaguely in the mist. The fog was thicker,
naturally, since the deck was closer to the water's edge.
"Hey!" growled a voice close beside him. "Passengers ain't allowed
down here."
An unshaven, soot-smeared figure loomed up. Bell could not see the man
save as a blur in the mist, but he said cheerfully:
"I know it, but I wanted to look. Seafaring's a trade I'd like to know
something about."
The figure grunted. Bell had just given his word of honor that he
wasn't a member of the Secret Service. He wasn't. But he was in the
Trade--which has no official existence anywhere. And the use of the
word in his first remark was a recognition signal.
"What is your trade, anyways?" growled the figure skeptically.
"I sharpen serpents' teeth from time to time," offered Bell amiably.
He recognized the man, suddenly. "Hullo, Jamison, you look like the
devil."
  *  *  *  *  *
Jamison drew nearer. He grunted softly.
"I know it. Listen closely, Bell. Your job is getting some information
from Canalejas, Minister of War in Rio. He sent word up to Washington
that he'd something important to say. It isn't treachery to Brazil,
because he's a decent man. Seven Secret Service men have disappeared
in South America within three months. They've found the eighth, and
he's crazy. Something has driven him mad, and they say it's a devilish
poison. He's a homicidal maniac, returning to the United States in a
straight-jacket. Canalejas knows what's happened to the Service men.
He said so, and he's going to tell us. His daughter brought the news
to Washington, and then instead of going on to Europe as she was
supposed to do, she started back to Rio. You're to get this formation
and pass it on to me, then try to keep your skin whole and act
innocent. You were picked out because, as a State Department man, hell
could be raised if you vanished. Understand?"
Bell nodded.
"Something horrible is going on. Secret Service can't do anything. The
man in Asunción isn't dead--he's been seen--but he's cut loose. And
Service men don't often do that. He don't report. That means the
Service code may have been turned over, and hell to pay generally.
It's up to the Trade."
"I've got it," said Bell. "Here are two items for you. Miss Canalejas
just said she suspected I was Secret Service. I convinced her I
wasn't. She says she has important information for a Service man."
  *  *  *  *  *
The brawny figure of the stoker growled.
"Damn women! She was told somebody'd be sent to see her father. She
was shown a recognition-knot with the outsider's variation. Given one,
for father. That'll identify you to him. But she shouldn't have
talked. Now, be careful. As nearly as we know, that chap in the
straight-jacket was given some poison that drove him insane. There are
hellish drugs down there. Maybe the same thing happened to others.
Look out for yourself, and give me the information Canalejas gives you
as quickly as God will let you. If anything happens to you, we want
the stuff to get back. Understand?"
"Of course," said Bell. He carefully did not shiver as he realized
what Jamison meant by anything happening to him. "The other item is
that Ortiz, ex-Minister of the Interior of the Argentine, is scared to
death about something. Sending radios right and left."
"Umph," growled Jamison. "One of our men vanished in Buenos Aires.
Watch him. You're friendly?"
"Yes."
"Get friendlier. See what he's got. Now shoo."
Bell swung up the ladder again. Mist opened before him and closed
again behind. He climbed over the rail to the promenade deck, and felt
a little flare of irritation. There was a figure watching him.
He slipped to the deck and grinned sheepishly at Paula Canalejas. She
stood with her hands in the pockets of her little sport coat,
regarding him very gravely.
  *  *  *  *  *
"I suppose," said Charley Bell sheepishly, "that I look like a fool.
But I've always wanted to climb up and down that ladder. I suppose
it's a survival from the age of childhood. At the age of seven I
longed to be a fireman."
"I wonder," said Paula quietly. "Mr. Bell"--she stepped close to
him--"I am taking a desperate chance. For the sake of my father, I
wish certain things known. I think that you are an honorable man, and
I think that you lied to me just now. Go and see Senor Ortiz. Your
government will want to know what happens to him. Go and see him
quickly."
Bell felt the same flare of irritation as before. Women do not follow
rules. They will not follow rules. They depend upon intuition, which
is sometimes right, but sometimes leads to ungodly errors. Paula was
right this time, but she could have been wholly and hopelessly wrong.
If she had talked to anyone else....
"My child," said Bell paternally--he was at least two years older than
Paula--"you should be careful. I did not lie to you just now. I am not
Secret Service. But I happen to know that you have a tiny piece of
string to give your father, and I beg of you not to show that to
anyone else. And--well--you are probably watched. You must not talk
seriously to me!"
He lifted his hat and started astern. He was more than merely
irritated. He was almost frightened. Because the Trade, officially,
does not exist at all, and everybody in the Trade is working entirely
on his own; and because those people who suspect that there is a Trade
and dislike it are not on their own, but have plenty of resources
behind them. And yet it is requisite that the Trade shall succeed in
its various missions. Always.
  *  *  *  *  *
The Government of the United States, you understand, will admit that
it has a Secret Service, which it strives to identify solely with the
pursuit of counterfeiters, postal thieves, and violators of the
prohibition laws. Strongly pressed, it will admit that some members of
the Secret Service work abroad, the official explanation being that
they work abroad to forestall smugglers. And at a pinch, and in
confidence, it may concede the existence of diplomatic secret agents.
But there is no such thing as the Trade. Not at all. The funds which
members of the Trade expend are derived by very devious bookkeeping
from the appropriations allotted to an otherwise honestly conducted
Department of the United States Government.
Therefore the Trade does not really exist. You might say that there is
a sort of conspiracy among certain people to do certain things. Some
of them are government officials, major and minor. Some of them are
private citizens, reputable and otherwise. One or two of them are in
jail, both here and abroad. But as far as the Government of the United
States is concerned, certain fortunate coincidences that happen now
and then are purely coincidences. And the Trade, which arranges for
them, does not exist. But it has a good many enemies.
  *  *  *  *  *
The fog-horn howled dismally overhead. Mist swirled past the ship, and
an oily swell surged vaguely overside and disappeared into a gray
oblivion half a ship's length away. Bell moved on toward the stern. It
was his intention to go into the smoking-room and idle ostentatiously.
Perhaps he would enter into another argument with that Brazilian air
pilot who had so much confidence in Handley-Page wing-slots. Bell had,
in Washington, a small private plane that, he explained, had been
given him by a wealthy aunt, who hoped he would break his neck in it.
He considered that wing-slots interfered with stunting.
He had picked out the door with his eye when he espied a small figure
standing by the rail. It was Ortiz, the Argentine ex-Cabinet Minister,
staring off into the grayness, and seeming to listen with all his
ears.
Bell slowed up. The little stout man turned and nodded to him, and
then put out his hand.
"Senor Bell," he said quietly, "tell me. Do you hear airplane motors?"
Bell listened. The drip-drip-drip of condensed mist. The shuddering of
the ship with her motors going dead slow. The tinkling, muted notes of
the piano inside the saloon. The washing and hissing of the waves
overside. That was all.
"Why, no," said Bell. "I don't. Sound travels freakishly in fog,
though. One might be quite close and we couldn't hear it. But we're a
hundred and fifty miles off the Venezuelan coast, aren't we?"
  *  *  *  *  *
Ortiz turned and faced him. Bell was shocked at the expression on the
small man's face. It was drained of all blood, and its look was
ghastly. But the rather fine dark eyes were steady.
"We are," agreed Ortiz, very steadily indeed, "but I--I have received
a radiogram that some airplane should fly near this ship, and it would
amuse me to hear it."
Bell frowned at the fog.
"I've done a good bit of flying," he observed, "and if I were flying
out at sea right now, I'd dodge this fog bank. It would be
practically suicide to try to alight in a mist like this."
Ortiz regarded him carefully. It seemed to Bell that sweat was coming
out upon the other man's forehead.
"You mean," he said quietly, "that an airplane could not land?"
"It might try," said Bell with a shrug. "But you couldn't judge your
height above the water. You might crash right into it and dive under.
Matter of fact, you probably would."
Ortiz's nostrils quivered a little.
"I told them," he said steadily, "I told them it was not wise to
risk...."
  *  *  *  *  *
He stopped. He looked suddenly at his hands, clenched upon the rail. A
depth of pallor even greater than his previous terrible paleness
seemed to leave even his lips without blood. He wavered on his feet,
as if he were staggering.
"You're sick!" said Bell sharply. Instinctively he moved forward.
The fine dark eyes regarded him oddly. And Ortiz suddenly took his
hands from the railing of the promenade deck. He looked at his fingers
detachedly. And Bell could see them writhing, opening and closing in a
horribly sensate fashion, as if they were possessed of devils and
altogether beyond the control of their owner. And he suddenly realized
that the steady, grim regard with which Ortiz looked at his hands was
exactly like the look he had seen upon a man's face once, when that
man saw a venomous snake crawling toward him and had absolutely no
weapon.
Ortiz was looking at his fingers as a man might look at cobras at the
ends of his wrists. Very calmly, but with a still, stunned horror.
  *  *  *  *  *
He lifted his eyes to Bell.
"I have no control over them," he said quietly. "My hands are useless
to me, Senor Bell. I wonder if you will be good enough to assist me to
my cabin."
Again that deadly pallor flashed across his face. Bell caught at his
arm.
"What is the matter?" he demanded anxiously. "Of course I'll help
you."
Ortiz smiled very faintly.
"If any airplane arrives in time," he said steadily, "something may be
done. But you have rid me of even that hope. I have been poisoned,
Senor Bell."
"But the ship's doctor...."
Ortiz, walking rather stiffly beside Bell, shrugged.
"He can do nothing. Will you be good enough to open this door for me?
And"--his voice was hoarse for an instant--"assist me to put my hands
in my pockets. I cannot. But I would not like them to be seen."
Bill took hold of the writhing fingers. He saw sweat standing out upon
Ortiz's forehead. And the fingers closed savagely upon Bell's hands,
tearing at them. Ortiz looked at him with a ghastly supplication.
"Now," he said with difficulty, "if you will open the door, Senor
Bell...."
Bell slid the door aside. They went in together. People were making
the best of boresome weather within, frankly yawning, most of them.
But the card-room would be full, and the smoking-room steward would be
busy.
"My cabin is upon the next deck below," said Ortiz through stiff lips.
"We--we will descend the stairs."
  *  *  *  *  *
Bell went with him, his face expressionless.
"My cabin should be unlocked," said Ortiz.
It was. Ortiz entered, and, with his hands still in his pockets,
indicated a steamer-trunk.
"Please open that." He licked his lips. "I--I had thought I would have
warning enough. It has not been so severe before. Right at the
top...."
Bell flung the top back. A pair of bright and shiny handcuffs lay on
top of a dress shirt.
"Yes," said Ortiz steadily. "Put them upon my wrists, please. The
poison that has been given to me is--peculiar. I believe that one of
your compatriots has experienced its effects."
Bell started slightly. Ortiz eyed him steadily.
"Precisely." Ortiz, with his face a gray mask of horror, spoke with a
steadiness Bell could never have accomplished. "A poison, Senor Bell,
which has made a member of the Secret Service of the United States a
homicidal maniac. It has been given to me. I have been hoping for its
antidote, but--Quick! Senor Bell! Quick! The handcuffs!"
CHAPTER II
The throbbing of the engines went on at an unvarying tempo. There was
the slight, almost infinitesimal tremor of their vibration. The
electric light in the cabin wavered rhythmically with its dynamo. From
the open porthole came the sound of washing water. Now and then a
disconnected sound of laughter or of speech came down from the main
saloon.
Ortiz lay upon the bed, exhausted.
"It is perhaps humorous, Senor Bell," he said presently, in the same
steady voice he had used upon the deck. "It is undoubtedly humorous
that I should call upon you. I believe that you are allied with the
Secret Service of your government."
Bell started to shake his head, but was still. He said nothing.
"I am poisoned," said Ortiz. He tried to smile, but it was ghastly.
"It is a poison which makes a man mad in a very horrible fashion. If I
could use my hands--and could trust them--I would undoubtedly shoot
myself. It would be entirely preferable. Instead, I hope--"
He broke off short and listened intently. His forehead beaded.
"Is that an airplane motor?"
Bell went to the port and listened. The washing of waves. The
throbbing of the ship's engines. The dismal, long-drawn-out moaning
of the fog-horn. Nothing else.... Yes! A dim and distant muttering. It
drew nearer and died away again.
"That is a plane," said Bell. "Yes, It's out of hearing now."
Ortiz clamped his jaws together.
"I was about to speak," he said steadily, "to tell you--many things.
Which your government should know. Instead, I ask you to go to the
wireless room and have the wireless operator try to get in touch with
that plane. It is a two-motored seaplane and it has a wireless outfit.
It will answer the call M.S.T.R. Ask him to use his directional
wireless and try to guide it to the ship. It brings the antidote to
the poison which affects me."
Bell made for the door. Ortiz raised his head with a ghastly smile.
"Close the door tightly," he said quietly. "I--I feel as if I shall be
unpleasant."
  *  *  *  *  *
Closing the door behind him, Bell felt rather like a man in a
nightmare. He made for the stairway, bolted for the deck, and fairly
darted up the ladder to the wireless room.
"Ortiz sent me," he said to the operator. "You heard that plane just
now. See if you can get it."
The operator looked up at him beneath a green eyeshade and grinned
crookedly.
"Talking to 'em now," he said.
The key flicked up and down, and a tiny dancing spark leaped into
being and vanished beneath its contact-point. The wireless room was
dark save for the bright, shaded light above the sending table. A file
of sent messages by an elbow. A pad for messages received was by a
hand. Stray wreaths of tobacco smoke floated about the room, leaping
into view as they drifted beneath the lamp.
"Is he bad?" asked the operator fascinatedly, his eyes fixed on his
key.
Bell felt his eyelids flicker.
"Very bad," he said shortly.
"They tell me," said the operator and shuddered, "your hands get
working and you can't stop 'em.... I'm playing, I am! I'm playing The
Master's game!"
  *  *  *  *  *
The key stopped. He listened.
"They're going to try to swoop over the ship and drop it," he said a
moment later. "I don't think they can. But tell Ortiz they're going to
try."
Bell's eyes were narrow. It is not customary for a radio operator on a
passenger ship to speak of an ex-Cabinet Minister of the Argentine
Republic by his surname only. It bespeaks either impertinence or a
certain very peculiar association. Bell frowned imperceptibly for an
instant, thinking.
"You've--had it?" he asked sharply.
"God, no! I never took the chance! I saw the red spots once, and I
went to Rib--Say! You got a password?"
He was staring up at Bell. Bell shrugged.
"I'm trying to help Senor Ortiz now."
The operator continued to stare, his eyes full of suspicion. Then he
grimaced.
"All right. Go tell him they're going to drop it."
  *  *  *  *  *
Bell went out. Gray fog, and washing seas, and the big ship ploughing
steadily on toward the south.... The horn blared, startlingly loud and
unspeakably doleful. Bell listened for other sounds. There were none.
Down the steep ladder to the promenade deck. Paula Canalejas nodded to
him.
"I saw you speak to Senor Ortiz," she said quietly. "You see?"
Bell was beginning to have a peculiar, horrible suspicion. It was
incredible, but it was inevitable.
"I think I see," he said harshly. "But I don't dare believe it. Keep
quiet and don't speak to me unless I give you some sign it's safe!
It's--hellish!"
He went inside and swiftly down the stairs. He found a steward
hesitating outside the door of Ortiz's cabin. He touched Bell's arm
anxiously as he was about to go in.
"Beg pardon, sir," he said, and stammered. "I--I heard Mr. Ortiz
making some--very strange noises, sir. I--I thought he was sick...."
"He is," said Bell grimly. "He told me he does not want a doctor,
though. I'm looking after him."
He closed the door behind him, and Ortiz grinned at him. It was a
horrible, a terrible grin, and Ortiz fought it from his face with a
terrific effort of will. There was foam about his lips.
  *  *  *  *  *
"_Dios!_ It was--it was devilish!" he gasped. "Senor Bell, _amigo
mio_, for the love of the good God get my revolver from my trunk. Give
it to me...."
Bell said shortly: "The airplane just radioed that it's going to try
to swoop overhead and drop a package on board the steamer. It doesn't
dare alight in this fog."
"I think," gasped Ortiz, "I think it would be well to tie my feet. Tie
them fast! If--if the package comes, if I--if I am unpleasant, knock
me unconscious and pour it into my mouth. I fear it is too late now.
But try it...."
Through the port came the muttering of a seaplane's engines. The noise
died away. Almost instantly the siren boomed hoarsely.
"Ah, _Dios!_" said Ortiz unsteadily. "There it is! Senor Bell, I think
it is too late. Would you--would you assist me to go out on deck,
where I might fling myself overboard? I--think I can control my legs
so long."
"Steady!" said Bell, wrenched by the sight of the man before him
fighting against unnameable horror. "Tell me--"
"It is poison," said Ortiz, his features fixed in a terrible effort of
will. "A ghastly, a horrible poison of the _Indios_ of Matto Grosso,
in Brazil. It drives a man mad, murder mad. It is as if he were
possessed by a devil. His hands first refuse to obey him. His feet
next. And then his body. It is as if a devil had seized hold of his
body and carried it about doing murder with it. A part of the brain is
driven insane, and a man goes about shrieking with the horror of what
crimes his body commits until the poison reaches that portion of his
brain as well. Then he is mad forever. That is what I face, _amigo
mio_. That is why I beg you, I implore you, to kill me or assist me to
the side of the ship so that I may fling myself overboard! The Master
had it administered to me secretly, and demanded treason as the price
of the antidote. He deman--"
  *  *  *  *  *
Steady and strong, rising from a muttering to a steady roar, the sound
of airplane motors came through the port. Bell started up.
"Hold fast," he snapped savagely. "I'll go get that package when it
lands. Hold fast, I tell you! Fight it!"
He flung out of the cabin and raced up the stairs. The door to the
deck was open. He crowded through a group of passengers who had
discounted the dampness for the sake of a novelty--an airplane far out
at sea--and raced up to the upper deck. The roaring noise was
receding. The siren roared hoarsely. Then the noise came back.
For minutes, then, the ship seemed to play hide-and-seek with the
invisible fliers. The roaring noise overhead circled about, now near,
now seeming very far away. And the siren sent its dismal blasts out
into the grayness all about. Then, for an instant, a swiftly scudding
shadow was visible overhead. It banked steeply and vanished, and
seemed to have turned and come lower when it reappeared a moment
later. It was not distinct, at first. It was merely a silhouette of
darker gray against the all-enveloping mist. But its edges sharpened
and became clear. One could make out struts, an aileron's trailing
edge.
"Got nerve, anyhow," said Bell grimly.
It swept across the ship and disappeared, but the noise of its engines
did not dwindle more than a little. The blast of the siren seemed to
summon it back again. Once more it came in sight, and this time it
dived steeply, flashed across the forecastle deck amid a hideous
uproar, desperately, horribly close to the dangling derrick-cables,
and was gone.
  *  *  *  *  *
Bell had seen it more clearly than anyone else on the ship, perhaps.
He saw a man in the pilot's cockpit between wings and tail reach high
and fling something downward, something with a long streamer attached
to it. Bell had an instant's glimpse of the goggled face. Then he was
darting forward, watching the thing that fell.
It took only a second. Two at most. But the thing seemed to fall with
infinite deliberation, the streamer shivering out behind it. It fell
at a steep slant, the forward momentum of the plane's speed added to
its own drop. It swooped down, slanting toward the rail....
Bell groaned. It struck the rail itself, and bounced. A sailor flung
himself toward it. The streamer slipped from his fingers and slithered
over the side.
Bell was at the railing just in time to see it drop into the water. He
opened his mouth to shout, and saw it sink. The last of the streamer
followed the dropped object down into the green water when it was
directly below him.
His hands clenched. Bell stared sickly at the spot where it had
vanished. An instant later he had whirled and was thrusting wide the
wireless room door. The operator was returning to his key, grinning
crookedly. He looked up sidewise.
"Tell them it went overside," snapped Bell. "Tell them to try it
again. Ortiz is in hell! To try again! He's dying!"
  *  *  *  *  *
The operator looked up fascinatedly, his fingers working his key.
"Is he--bad?" he asked with a shuddering interest.
"He's dying!" snarled Bell, in a rage because of his helplessness. He
had forgotten everything but the fact that a man below decks was
facing the most horrible fate that can overtake a man, and facing it
with a steadfast gameness that made Bell's heart go out to him.
"They don't die," said the operator. He shuddered. "They don't die of
it."
His key stopped. He listened. His key clicked again.
"They only had two packages," he said a moment later. "They don't dare
risk the other one. They say the fog ends twenty miles farther on.
They're going to land up there and taxi back on the surface of the
water. It shouldn't be more than half an hour."
He pushed himself back from the table with an air of finality.
"That's all. They've signed off."
Bell felt rage sweeping over him. The operator grinned crookedly.
"Better go down and tie him up," he said, and licked his lips with the
fascinated air of one thinking of a known and terrifying thing.
"Better tie him up tight. It'll be half an hour more."
  *  *  *  *  *
Bell went down the companion-ladder. The promenade was crowded with
passengers now, asking questions of each other. Some, frowning
portentously, thought the plane an unscheduled ocean flier who had
lost his way in the fog.
Paula Canalejas was close to Bell as he shouldered his way through the
crowd.
"That was for him?" she asked, without moving her lips.
Bell nodded.
"Tell him," she said quietly, "I--pray for him."
Bell nodded abruptly and went into the saloon. It was nearly empty. He
wiped the sweat off his face. It was horrible to have to go down to
Ortiz and tell him that at best it would be half an hour more....
Then there was a sudden scream below him, and then a shot. Bell jumped
for the stairs, his heart in his throat, and saw Ortiz coming out of
his stateroom door. His eyes were wide and agonized. His body....
Even in the incredibly short time before he reached the bottom of the
steps, Bell had time to receive the ghastly impression that Ortiz was
sane, but that his body had gone mad. Ortiz's face was white and
horrified. His hands and arms were writhing savagely, working at the
handcuffs on his wrists. His legs were carrying him at a curious,
padding trot down the hallway. One of the hands held a glittering
revolver. A steward was crouched behind a couch, his face white and
filled with stark terror. And Ortiz held his head back, as if
struggling to hold back and control his body, which was under the
control of a malignant demon.
"Out of the way!" cried Ortiz in a voice of terrible despair. "Get
someone to shoot me! Kill me! I cannot--ah, _Dios!_"
  *  *  *  *  *
The hands leveled the revolver in spite of him, while he flung his
head from side to side in a frantic attempt to disturb their aim.
"Close your eyes!" panted Bell, and hurled himself upon--whom? It was
not Ortiz. It was Ortiz's body, gone mad and raging. The manacled arms
flailed about frenziedly. The gun went off. Again. Again....
Bell struck. He knocked the Thing that possessed Ortiz's body off its
feet. The hands groped for him. They clubbed at him with the revolver.
The feet kicked....
"Keep your eyes closed," gasped Bell, struggling to get the gun away
from those horrible hands. "It--it can't see when you keep your eyes
closed!"
Fighting insanely as the Thing was fighting, he could not identify it
with Ortiz himself. One of the hands unclosed from about the revolver
and clawed at his throat. It seemed to abandon that effort and
attacked Ortiz's face in a frenzy of rage, struggling to claw his eyes
open. The other held the weapon fast with maniacal strength.
At the horror of feeling one of his own manacled hands attacking his
face savagely as if it were itself a sensate thing, Ortiz opened his
eyes. They were wide with despair.
The hand with the revolver made a sudden movement, and Bell flung his
weight upon it as the clutching hand pulled the trigger. There was a
deafening report....
  *  *  *  *  *
The body seemed to weaken suddenly in Bell's grip. It fought less and
less terribly, though with no lessening of its savagery. He managed to
get the revolver away from the hands that shook with unspeakable rage.
He flung it away and stood panting.
There was a crowd of people suddenly all about the place. Staring,
stunned, incredulous people who regarded Bell with a dawning, damning
suspicion.
Ortiz spoke suddenly. His voice was weak, but it was steady, and it
was full of a desperate relief.
"I wish to make a statement," he said sharply. "I--I wished to commit
suicide for personal reasons. Senor Bell tried to dissuade me. The
handcuffs upon my wrists were placed there with my consent. Senor Bell
is my friend and has done me no wrong. I shot myself, with intention."
Bell beckoned to the ship's doctor.
"Get him bandaged up," he ordered harshly. "There's no need for him to
die."
The body was writhing only feebly, now. Ortiz looked up at him, and
managed a smile. Again there was that incredible impression of the
body not belonging to Ortiz, or Ortiz as a sane and whole and
honorable, admirable man, and the feebly writhing body with its
clutching hands as some evil thing that had properly been defeated and
killed.
  *  *  *  *  *
The doctor bent down. It was useless, of course. He made futile
movements.
"I wish to speak to my friend, Senor Bell," said Ortiz weakly. "I--I
have not long."
Bell knelt beside him.
"The Master's--deputy in Rio," panted Ortiz weakly, almost in a
whisper, "is--is Ribiera. In Buenos Aires I--I do not know. There was
a man--the one who poisoned me--but I killed him. Secretly. I do not
think--the Master knows. I pray that--"
He stopped. He could not speak again. But he smiled, and a few seconds
later Bell clenched his hands. Ortiz was gone.
Someone touched his arm. Paula Canalejas. He stared down at her and
managed to smile. It was not a very successful smile. He drew a deep
breath.
"I would like," said Bell wryly, "to think that, when I die, I will
die as well as this man did. But I'm afraid I shan't."
But Paula said:
"The airplane can be heard outside. It seems to be moving on the
surface."
  *  *  *  *  *
And ten minutes later the plane loomed up out of the mist, queerly
ungainly on the surface of the water. Its motors roared impatiently as
if held in leash. It swung clumsily about, heading off out of sight in
the fog to turn. It came back, sliding along the top of the water with
its wing-tip floats leaving alternate streaks of white foam behind
them. A man stood up in its after cockpit.
Bell crowded to the rail. The man--goggled and masked--held up a
package as if to fling it on board. Bell watched grimly. But he saw
that the pilot checked himself and looked up at the upper deck. Bell
craned his neck. The wireless operator was waving wildly to the
seaplane. He writhed his hands, and held his hand to his head is if
blowing out his brains, and waved the plane away, frantically.
The pilot of the plane sat down. A moment later its motors roared more
thunderously. It is not safe to alight on either land or water when
fog hangs low, but there is little danger in taking off.
The seaplane shot away into the mist, its motors bellowing. The sound
of its going changed subtly. It seemed to rise, and grow more
distant.... It died away.
Bell halted at the top of the companion-ladder and saw the wireless
operator, with a crooked, nervous grin upon his face.
CHAPTER III
Bell saw what he was looking for, out in the throng of traffic that
filled the Avenida do Acre, in Rio. He'd seen it over the heads of the
crowd, which was undersized, as most Brazilian crowds are, and he
managed to get through the perpetual jam on the mosaic sidewalk and
reach the curb.
He stood there and regarded the vehicles filling the broad avenue,
wearing exactly the indifferent, half-amused air of a tourist with no
place in particular to go and a great deal of time in which to go
there. Taxis chuffed past, disputing right of way with private cars
which were engaged in more disputes with other cars, all in the rather
extraordinary bad temper and contentiousness which comes to the
Latin-American when he takes the wheel of an automobile.
As if coming to an unimportant decision, Bell raised his hand to an
approaching cab. It had two men on the chauffeur's seat. Of course.
All taxis in Rio carry two men in front. One drives, and the other
lights his cigarettes, makes witty comments upon passing ladies, and
helps in collecting the fares from recalcitrant passengers. The extra
man is called the "secretary," and he assists materially in giving an
impression of haughty pride.
The taxi ground to the curb. The secretary reached behind him
indifferently and opened the door. Bell did not glance at him. He
stepped inside and settled down languidly.
"The Beira Mar," he said listlessly.
The taxi started off with a jolt. It is the invariable custom in Rio
de Janeiro. And besides, it reminds the passenger that he is merely a
customer, admitted to the cab on suffrance, and that he must be
suitably meek to those who will presently blandly ignore the amount
registered by the meter and demand a fare of from eight to
twenty-seven times the indicated amount.
  *  *  *  *  *
The cab went shooting down the Avenida do Acre toward the harbor. The
Avenida do Acre is officially the Avenida Rio Blanco, and it should be
called by that name, only people forget. The Beira Mar, however, is
named with entire propriety. It is actually the edge of the sea, and
it is probably one of the two or three most beautiful driveways in the
world.
The cab whirled past the crowded sidewalks. Incredible numbers of
people, with an incredible variation in the shades of their
complexions, moved to and from with the peculiar aimlessness of a
Brazilian crowd. A stout and pompous negro politician from Bahia,
wearing an orchid in his button-hole, rubbed elbows with a striking
blonde lady of the sidewalks on his left, and forced a wizened little
silk-hatted _parda_--approximately an octoroon--to dodge about him in
order to progress. A young and languid person, his clothes the very
last expiring gasp of fashion, fingered his stick patiently. He wore
the painstakingly cultivated expression of bored disillusionment your
young Brazilian dandy considers aristocratic. It was very probable
that he shared a particularly undesirable bedroom with four or five
other young men in order to purchase such clothing, but then, _farenda
fita_--making a picture--is the national Brazilian sport.
Bell lighted a cigarette. It was not wise to regard the secretary of
this particular taxi too closely, but if his face had been thickly
smeared with coal dust, and if he had had a two weeks' beard, and if
he had been seen on the forecastle of the _Almirante Gomez_, one would
have deduced him to be a stoker who had not used the name of Jamison.
  *  *  *  *  *
The cab reached the Beira Mar, and turned to take the long route about
the bay. It is one of the most beautiful views to be found anywhere,
and tall apartment houses have been built along its whole length to
capitalize the scenery. True, the more brightly-colored ladies of the
capital have established themselves in vast numbers among these
apartment houses, but in their languid promenades they add--let us
say--the beauties of art to those of nature.
A voice spoke from the chauffeur's seat.
"Bell."
"Right," said Bell without moving. His eyes flickered, however, and he
found the device Jamison had inserted. A speaking-tube of sorts. Not
especially efficient, but inconspicuous enough. He stirred listlessly
and got his lips near it.
"All right to talk?" he asked briefly.
"Shoot," said Jamison from the secretary's seat beside the chauffeur.
"This man doesn't understand English, and he thinks I'm in a smuggling
gang. He expects to make some money out of me eventually."
Bell spoke curtly, while the taxi rolled past the Morro da Gloria with
its quaint old church and went along the winding, really marvelous
driveway past many beaches, with the incredibly blue water beyond.
"Canalejas is out of town," he said. "It isn't known when he'll be
back. I met his daughter at a dance at our Embassy here, and she told
me. We didn't dare to talk much, but she's frightened. Especially
after what happened to Ortiz. And I've met Ribiera, whom Ortiz named."
"I've been looking him up," growled Jamison through the speaking-tube.
  *  *  *  *  *
Bell flicked the ash from his cigarette out the door, and went on
quietly.
"He's trying to get friendly with me. I've promised to call at his
house and have him take me out to the flying field. He has two planes,
he tells me, a big amphibian and a two-seater. Uses them for commuting
between Rio and his place back inland. He went out of his way to
cultivate me. I think he suspects I'm trying to find out something."
"Which you are," said Jamison dryly. "You've found out that Ortiz was
right at least about--"
Bell nodded, and frowned at himself for having nodded. He spoke into
the mouthpiece by his head with an expressionless face.
"He's practically fawned upon by a bunch of important officials and
several high ranking army officers. Suspecting what I do, I think he's
got hold of a devil of a lot of power."
Jamison scowled in a lordly fashion upon a mere pedestrian who
threatened to impede the movement of the taxicab by making it run over
him.
  *  *  *  *  *
"Ortiz," said Bell quietly, "told me he'd been poisoned, and treason
asked as the price of the antidote. I've heard that the Brazilian
Minister for Foreign Affairs went insane six months ago. I heard,
also, that it was homicidal mania--murder madness. And I'm wondering
if these people who fawn upon Ribiera aren't paying a price
for--well--antidotes, or their equivalent. The Minister for Foreign
Affairs may have refused."
"You're improving," said Jamison dryly. The taxi rounded a curve and
a vista of sea and sand and royal palms spread out before it. "Yes,
you're improving. But Ortiz spoke of Ribiera only as a deputy of The
Master. Who is The Master?"
"God knows," said Bell. He stared languidly out of the window, for all
the world to see. A tourist, regarding the boasted beauties of the
Biera Mar.
"A deputy," said Jamison without emotion, "of some unknown person
called The Master poisoned Ortiz in Buenos Aires. And Ortiz was an
important man in the Argentine. Ribiera is merely the deputy of that
same unknown Master in Rio, and he has generals and state presidents
and the big politicians paying court to him. If deputies in two
countries that we know of have so much power, how much power has The
Master?"
  *  *  *  *  *
Silence. The taxi chugged steadily past unnoticed beauties and
colorings. Rio is really one of the most beautiful cities in the
world.
"It's like this," said Jamison jerkily. "Seven Service men vanish and
one goes mad. You get two tips that the fate of Ortiz is the fate of
the seven men--eight, in fact. We find that two men dispense a certain
ghastly poison in two certain cities, at the orders of a man they call
The Master. We find that those two men wield an astounding lot of
power, and we know they're only deputies, only subordinates of the
Master. We know, also, that the Service men vanished all over the
whole continent, not in just those two cities. How many deputies has
The Master? What's it all about? He wanted treason of Ortiz, we know.
What does he want of the other men his deputies have enslaved? Why did
he poison the Service men? And why--especially why--do two honorable
men, officials of two important nations, want to tip off the United
States Government about the ghastly business? What's it got to do with
our nation?"
Bell flung away his cigarette.
"That last question has occurred to me too," he observed, and
carefully repressed a slight shiver. "I have made a guess, which is
probably insane. I'm going to see Ribiera this afternoon."
"He already suspects you know too much," said Jamison without
expression.
"I am"--Bell managed the ghost of a mirthless smile--"I am
uncomfortably aware of it. And I may need an antidote as badly as
Ortiz. If I do, and can't help myself, I'll depend on you."
  *  *  *  *  *
Jamison growled.
"I simply mean," said Bell very quietly, "that I'd really rather not
be--er--left alive if I'm mad. That's all. But Ortiz knew what was the
matter with him before he got bad off. I know it's a risk. I'm
goose-flesh all over. But somebody's got to take the risk. The guess
I've made may be insane, but if it's right one or two lives will be
cheap enough as a price for the information. Suppose you chaps turn
around and take me to Ribiera's house?"
There was a long pause. Then Jamison spoke in Portuguese to his
companion. The taxi checked, swerved, and began to retrace its route.
"You're a junior in the Trade," said Jamison painstakingly. "I can't
order you to do it."
Bell fumbled with his cigarette case.
"The Trade doesn't exist, Jamison," he said dryly. "And besides,
nobody gives orders in The Trade. There are only suggestions. Now shut
up a while. I want to try to remember some consular reports I read
once, from the consul at Puerto Pachecho."
"What?"
"The consul there," said Bell, smiling faintly, "was an amateur
botanist. He filled up his consular reports with accounts of native
Indian medicinal plants and drugs, with copious notes and clinical
observations. I had to reprove him severely for taking up space with
such matters and not going fully into the exact number of hides, wet
and dry, that passed through the markets in his district. His
information will be entirely useless in this present emergency, but
I'm going to try to remember as much of it as I can. Now shut up."
  *  *  *  *  *
When the taxi swung off the Biera Mar to thread its way through many
tree-lined streets--it is a misdemeanor, punishable by fine, to cut
down a tree in Rio de Janeiro--it carried a young American with the
air of an accomplished idler, who has been mildly bored by the
incomparable view from the waterside boulevard. When it stopped at the
foot of one of the slum covered _morros_ that dot all Rio, and a
liveried doorman came out of a splendid residence to ask the visitor
his name, the taxi discharged a young American who seemed to feel the
heat, in spite of the swift motion of the cab. He wiped off his
forehead with his handkerchief as he was assured that the Senhor
Ribiera had given orders he was to be admitted, night or day. When the
taxi drove off, it carried two men on the chauffeur's seat, of whom
one had lost, temporarily, the manner of haughty insolence which is
normally inseparable from the secretary of a taxicab chauffeur.
But though he wiped his forehead with his handkerchief, Bell actually
felt rather cold when he followed his guide through ornately furnished
rooms, which seemed innumerable, and was at last left to wait in an
especially luxurious salon.
There was a pause. A rather long wait. A distinctly long wait. Bell
lighted a cigarette and seemed to become mildly bored. He regarded a
voluptuous small statuette with every appearance of pleased interest.
A subtly decadent painting seemed to amuse him considerably. He did
not seem to notice that no windows at all were visible, and that
shaded lamps lit this room, even in broad daylight.
  *  *  *  *  *
Two servants came in, a footman in livery and the major-domo. Your
average _Carioca_ servant is either fawning or covertly insolent.
These two were obsequious. The footman carried a tray with a bottle,
glass, ice, and siphon.
"The Senhor Ribiera," announced the major-domo obsequiously, "begs
that the Senhor Bell will oblige him by waiting for the shortest of
moments until the Senhor Ribiera can relieve himself of a business
matter. It will be but the shortest of moments."
Bell felt a little instinctive chill at sight of the bottle and
glasses.
"Oh, very well," he said idly. "You may put the tray there."
The footman lifted the siphon expectantly. Bell regarded it
indifferently. The wait before the arrival of this drink had been
longer than would be required merely for the announcing of a caller
and the tending of a tray, especially if such a tray were a custom of
the place. And the sending of a single bottle only, without inquiry
into his preferences....
"No soda," said Bell. He poured out a drink into the tinier glass. He
lifted it toward his lips, hesitated vaguely, and drew out his
handkerchief again.
He sneezed explosively, and the drink spilled. He swore irritably, put
down the glass, and plied his handkerchief vigorously. A moment later
he was standing up and pouring the drink out afresh, from the bottle
in one hand to the glass in the other. He up-tilted the glass.
"Get rid of this for me," he said annoyedly of the handkerchief.
  *  *  *  *  *
He saw a nearly imperceptible glance pass between the footman and the
major-domo. They retired, and Bell moved about the room exactly like a
young man who has been discomfited by the necessity of sneezing before
servants. Anywhere else in the world, of course, such a pose would not
have been convincing. But your Brazilian not only adopts _fazenda
fita_ as his own avocation, but also suspects it to be everybody
else's too. And a young Brazilian of the leisure class would be
horribly annoyed at being forced to so plebeian an exhibition in
public.
He moved restlessly about the room, staring at the picture. Presently
he blinked uncertainly and gazed about less definitely. He went rather
uncertainly to the chair he had first occupied and sat down. He
poured--or seemed to pour--another drink. Again he sneered, and looked
mortified. He put down the glass with an air of finality. But he
looked puzzledly about him. Then he sank back in his chair and
gradually seemed to sink into a sort of apathetic indifference.
  *  *  *  *  *
He looked, then, like a very bored young man on the verge of dozing
off. But actually he was very much alert indeed. He had the feeling of
eyes upon him for a while. Then that sensation ceased and he settled
himself to wait. And meantime he felt a particular, peculiar gratitude
to the late American consul at Puerto Pachecho for his interest in
medicinal plants.
That gentleman had gone into the subject with the passionate
enthusiasm of the amateur. He had described _icus_, _uirari_ and
_timbo_. He had particularized upon _makaka-nimbi_ and _hervamoura_.
And he had gone into a wealth of detail concerning _yagué_, on account
of its probable value if used in criminology. As consul at Puerto
Pachecho he was not altogether a success in some ways, but he had
invented an entirely original method of experimentation upon those
drugs and poisons which did not require to be introduced into the
blood-stream. His method was simplicity itself. An alcoholic solution
"carried" a minute quantity of the drug in its vapor, just as an
alcoholic solution carries a minute quantity of perfuming essential
oil. He inhaled the odor of the alcoholic solution. The effect was
immediately, strictly temporary, and not dangerous. He was enabled to
describe the odors, in some cases the tastes, and in a few instances
the effects of the substances he listed, from personal experience.
  *  *  *  *  *
And Bell had used his method as an unpromising but possible test for a
drug in the drink that had been brought him. He inhaled the strangling
odor of the spilled liquor on his handkerchief. And there was a drug
involved. For an instant he was dizzy, and for an instant he saw the
room through a vivid blue haze. And something clicked in his brain and
said "It's _yagué_." And the relief of dealing with something which he
knew--if only at second-hand--was so enormous that he felt almost
weak.
_Yagué_, you see, is an extract from the leaves of a plant which is
not yet included in materia medica. It has nearly the effect of
scopolamine--once famous in connection with twilight sleep--and
produces a daze of blue light, an intolerable sleepiness, and
practically all the effects of hypnotism. A person under _yagué_, as
under scopolamine or hypnosis, will seem to slumber and yet will obey
any order, by whomever given. He will answer any question without
reserve or any concealment. And on awakening he will remember nothing
done under the influence of the potion. The effects are not
particularly harmful.
Bell then, sat in an apparent half-daze, half-slumber, in the salon in
which he waited for Ribiera to appear. He knew exactly what he was
expected to do. Ribiera wanted to find out what he knew or suspected
about Ortiz's death. Ribiera wanted to know many things, and he would
believe what Bell told him because he thought Bell had taken enough
_yagué_ to be practically an hypnotic subject. Let Ribiera believe
what he was told!
When he came into the room, bland and smiling, Bell did not stir. He
was literally crawling, inside, with an unspeakable repulsion to the
man and the things for which he stood. But he seemed dazed and dull,
and when Ribiera began to ask questions he babbled his answers in a
toneless, flat voice. He babbled very satisfactorily, in Ribiera's
view.
  *  *  *  *  *
When Ribiera shook him roughly by the shoulder he started, and let his
eyes clear. Ribiera was laughing heartily.
"Senhor! Senhor!" said Ribiera jovially. "My hospitality is at fault!
You come to be my guest and I allow you to be so bored that you drop
off to sleep! I was detained for five minutes and came in to find you
slumbering!"
Bell stared ruefully about him and rubbed his eyes.
"I did, for a fact," he admitted apologetically. "I'm sorry. Up late
last night, and I was tired. I dropped in to see those planes you
suggested I'd be interested in. But I daresay it's late, now."
Ribiera chuckled again. He was in his late and corpulent forties and
was something of a dandy. If one were captious, one might object to
the thickness of his lips. They suggested sensuality. And there was a
shade--a bare shade--more of pigment in his skin than the American
passes altogether unquestioned. And his hair was wavy.... But he could
be a charming host.
"We'll have a drink," he said bluntly, "while the car's coming around
to the door, and then go out to the flying field."
"No drink," said Bell, lifting his hand. "I feel squeamish now. I say!
Haven't you changed the lamps, or something? Everything looks
blue...."
That was a lie. Things looked entirely normal to Bell. But he looked
about him as if vaguely puzzled. If he had drunk the liquor Ribiera
had sent him, things would have had a bluish tinge for some time
after. But as it was....
Ribiera chaffed him jovially on the way to the flying field. And
introducing him to fliers and officials of the field, he told with
gusto of Bell's falling asleep while waiting for him. A very jolly
companion, Ribiera.
But Bell saw two or three men looking at him very queerly. Almost
sympathetically. And he noticed, a little later, that a surprising
number of fliers and officials of the airport seemed to be concealing
an abject terror of Ribiera. One or two of them seemed to hate him as
well.
CHAPTER IV
Bell stepped out of a tall French window to a terrace, and from the
terrace to the ground. There was a dull muttering in the sky to the
east, and a speck appeared, drew nearer swiftly, grew larger, and
became a small army biplane. It descended steeply to earth behind a
tall planting of trees. Bell lighted a cigarette and moved
purposelessly down an elaborately formalized garden.
"More victims," he observed grimly to himself, of the plane.
Ribiera lifted a pigmented hand to wave languidly from a shaded chair.
There were women about him, three of them, and it sickened Bell to see
the frightened assiduity with which they flattered him. Bell had met
them, of course. Madame the wife of the State President of Bahia--in
the United States of Brazil the states have presidents instead of
governors--preferred the title of "Madame" because it was more foreign
and consequently more aristocratic than Senhora. And Madame the wife
of the General--
"Senhor," called Ribiera blandly, "I have news for you."
Bell turned and went toward him with an air of pleased expectancy. He
noticed for the first time the third of the women. Young, in the first
flush of youthful maturity, but with an expression of stark terror
lingering behind a palpably assumed animation.
"An acquaintance of yours, Senhor," said Ribiera, "is to be my
guests."
Bell steeled himself.
"The Senhor Canalejas," said Ribiera, beaming, "and his daughter."
  *  *  *  *  *
Bell seemed to frown, and then seemed to remember.
"Oh, yes," he said carelessly, "I met her in Washington. She was on
the _Almirante Gomez_, coming down."
The next instant he saw Ribiera's expression, and cursed himself for a
fool. Ribiera's eyes had narrowed sharply. Then they half-closed, and
he smiled.
"She is charming," said Ribiera in drowsy contentment, "and I had
thought you would be glad to improve her acquaintance. Especially
since, as my friend, you may congratulate me. A contract of marriage
is under discussion."
Bell felt every muscle grow taut. The fat, pigmented man before
him....
"Indeed," said Bell politely, "I do congratulate you."
Ribiera looked at him with an expression in which a sardonic
admiration mingled with something else less pleasant.
"You are clever, Senhor Bell," he said heavily, seeming to sink more
deeply into his chair. "Very clever." He shifted his eyes to the women
who stood about him. "You may go," he said indifferently. His tone was
exactly that of a despot dismissing his slaves. Two of them colored
with instinctive resentment. His eyes lingered an instant on the
third. Her face had showed only a passionate relief. "You, Senhora,"
he said heavily, "may wait nearby."
The terror returned to her features, but she moved submissively to a
spot a little out of earshot. Bell found his jaws clenched. There is a
certain racial taint widespread in Brazil which leads to an
intolerable arrogance when there is the slightest opportunity for its
exercise. Ribiera had the taint, and Bell felt a sickening wrath at
the terrified submission of the women.
"_Si_," said Ribiera, suddenly adverting to insolence. "You are
clever, Senhor Bell. Where did you learn of _yagué_?"
  *  *  *  *  *
Bell inhaled leisurely. His muscles were tense, but he gave no outward
sign. Instead, he sat down comfortably upon the arm of a chair facing
Ribiera's. The only way to meet insolence is with equal insolence and
a greater calm.
"Ah!" said Bell pleasantly. "So you found out it didn't work, after
all!"
Ribiera's eyes contracted. He became suddenly enraged.
"You are trifling with me," he said furiously. "Do you know the
penalty for that?"
"Why, yes," said Bell, and smiled amiably. "A dose of--er--poison of
The Master's private brand."
It was a guess, but based on a good deal of evidence. Ribiera turned
crimson, then pale.
"What do you know?" he demanded in a deadly quietness. "You cannot
leave this place. You are aware of that. The people here--guests and
servants--are my slaves, the slaves of The Master. You cannot leave
this place except also as my slave. I will have you bound and given
_yagué_ so that you cannot fail to tell me anything that I wish to
know. I will have you tortured so that you will gladly say anything
that I wish, in return for death. I will--"
"You will," said Bell dryly, "drop dead with seven bullets in your
body if you give a signal for anyone to attack me."
  *  *  *  *  *
Ribiera stared at him as his hand rested negligently in his coat
pocket. And then, quite suddenly Ribiera began to chuckle. His rage
vanished. He laughed, a monstrous, gross, cackling laughter.
"You have been my guest for two days," he gasped, slapping his fat
knees, "and you have not noticed that your pistol his been tampered
with! Senhor Bell! Senhor Bell! My uncle will be disappointed in you!"
It seemed to impress him as a victory that Bell had been depending
upon an utterly futile threat for safety. It restored his good humor
marvelously.
"It does not matter," he said jovially. "Presently you will tell me
all that I wish to know. More, perhaps. My uncle is pleased with you.
You recall your little talk with the wireless operator on the
_Almirante Gomez_? You tried to learn things from him, Senhor. He
reported it. Of course. All our slaves report. He sent his report to
my uncle, The Master, and I did not have it until to-day. I will admit
that you deceived me. I knew you had talked with Ortiz, who was a
fool. I thought that in his despair he might have spoken. I gave you
_yagué_, as I thought, and informed my uncle that you knew nothing.
And he is very much pleased with you. It was clever to deceive me
about the _yagué_. My uncle has high praise for you. He has told me
that he desires your services."
Bell inhaled again. There was no question but that Ribiera was totally
unafraid of the threat he had made. His gun must have been tampered
with, the firing-pin filed off perhaps. So Bell said placidly:
"Well? He desires my services?"
  *  *  *  *  *
Ribiera chuckled, in his gross and horrible good humor.
"He will have them. Senhor. He will have them. When you observe your
hands writhing at the ends of your wrists, you will enter his service,
through me. Of course. And he will reward you richly. Money, much
money, such as I have. And slaves--such as I have. The Senhora...."
Ribiera looked at the terrified girl standing thirty or forty feet
away. He chuckled again.
"My uncle desires that you should be induced to enter his service of
your own will. So, Senhor, you shall see first what my uncle's service
offers. And later, when you know what pleasures you may some day
possess as my uncle's deputy in your own nation, why, then the fact
that your hands are writhing at the ends of your wrists will be merely
an added inducement to come to me. And I bear you no ill will for
deceiving me. You may go."
Bell rose.
"And still," he said dryly, "I suspect that you are deceived. But now
you deceive yourself."
He heard Ribiera chuckling as he walked away. He heard him call,
amusedly, "Senhora." He heard the little gasp of terror with which the
girl obeyed. He passed her, stumbling toward the gross fat man with
the light brown skin and curly hair. Her eyes were literally pools of
anguish.
  *  *  *  *  *
Bell threw away his cigarette and began to fumble for another. He was
beginning to feel the first twinges of panic, and fought them down.
Ribiera had not lied. Bell had been at this _fazenda_ of his--which
was almost a miniature Versailles three hundred miles from Rio--for
two days. In all that time he had not seen one person besides himself
who did not display the most abject terror of Ribiera. Ribiera had
made no idle boast when he said that everyone about, guests and
servants, were slaves. They were. Slaves of a terror vastly greater
than mere fear of death. It--
"Senhor!... _Oh, Dios!_" It was the girl's voice, in despair.
Ribiera laughed. Bell felt a red mist come before his eyes.
He deliberately steadied his hands and lighted his cigarette. He heard
stumbling footsteps coming behind him. A hand touched his arm. He
turned to see the girl Ribiera had pointed out, her cheeks utterly,
chalky white, trying desperately to smile.
"Senhor!" she gasped. "Smile at me! For the love of God, smile at me!"
In the fraction of a second, Bell was mad with rage. He understood,
and he hated Ribiera with a corrosive hatred past conception. And then
he was deathly calm, and wholly detached, and he smiled widely, and
turned and looked at Ribiera, and Ribiera's whole gross bulk quivered
as he chuckled. Bell took the girl's arm with an excessive politeness
and managed--he never afterward understood how he managed it--to grin
at Ribiera.
"Senhora," he said in a low tone, "I think I understand. Stop being
afraid. We can fool him. Come and walk with me and talk. The idea is
that he must think you are trying to fascinate me, is it not?"
She spoke through stiffened lips.
"Ah, that I could die!"
Bell had a horrible part to play while he walked the length of the
formal garden with her, and found a pathway leading out of it, and led
her out of sight. He stopped.
"Now," he said sharply, "tell me. I am not yet his slave. He has
ordered you...."
She was staring before her with wide eyes that saw only despair.
"I--I am to persuade you to be my lover," she said dully, "or I shall
know the full wrath of The Master...."
  *  *  *  *  *
Bell asked questions, crisply, but as gently as he could.
"We are his slaves," she told him apathetically. "I and _mi
Arturo_--my husband. Both of us...." She roused herself little under
Bell's insistent questioning. "We were guests at his house at dinner.
Our friends, people high in society and in the Republic, were all
about us. We suspected nothing. We had heard nothing. But two weeks
later Arturo became irritable. He said that he saw red spots before
his eyes. I also. Then Arturo's hands writhed at the ends of his
wrists. He could not control them. His nerves were horrible. And mine.
And we--we have a tiny baby.... And Senhor Ribiera called upon my
husband. He was charming. He observed my husband's hands. He had a
remedy, he said. He gave it to my husband. He became normal again. And
then--my hands writhed. Senhor Ribiera told my husband that if he
would bring me to him.... And I was relieved. We were grateful. We
accepted the invitation of the Senhor Ribiera to this place. And he
showed us a man, in chains. He--he went mad before our eyes. He was a
member of the United States Secret Service.... And then the Senhor
Ribiera told us that we faced the same fate if we did not serve
him...."
  *  *  *  *  *
Bell had thrust aside rage as useless, now. He was deliberately cold.
"And so?"
"It is a poison," she said unsteadily. "A deadly, a horrible poison
which drives men murder mad in two weeks from the time of its
administration. The Senhor Ribiera has an antidote for it. But mixed
with the antidote, which acts at once, is more of the horrible poison,
which will act in two weeks more. So that we are entrapped. If we
disobey him...."
Bell began to smile slowly, and not at all mirthfully.
"I think," he said softly, "that I shall gain a great deal of pleasure
from killing the Senhor Ribiera."
"_Dios_--" She strangled upon the word. "Do you not see, Senhor, that
if he dies we--we--" She stopped and choked. "We--have a tiny baby,
Senhor. We--we would...."
Again sick rage surged up in Bell. To kill Ribiera meant to drive his
slaves mad, and mad in the most horrible fashion that can be imagined.
To kill Ribiera meant to have these people duplicate the death of
Ortiz, as their greatest hope, or to fill madhouses with snarling
animals lusting to kill....
"It is--it is not only I, Senhor," said the girl before him. She was
utterly listless, and in the agony of despair. "It is Arturo, also.
The Senhor Ribiera has said that if I do not persuade you, that both
Arturo and I.... And our little baby, Senhor!... Our families also
will be entrapped some day. He has said so.... He will give that
poison to our baby.... And it will grow up either his slave, or--"
Her eyes were pools of panic.
"Oh, God!" said Bell very quietly. "And he's offering me this power!
He's trying to persuade me to become like him. He's offering me
pleasures!"
  *  *  *  *  *
He laughed unpleasantly. And then he went sick with helplessness. He
could kill Ribiera, perhaps, and let only God know how many people go
mad. Perhaps. Or perhaps Ribiera would merely be supplanted by another
man. Ortiz had said that he killed The Master's deputy in Buenos
Aires, but that another man had taken his place. And the thing went
on. And The Master desired a deputy in the United States....
"Somehow," said Bell very softly, "this has got to be stopped.
Somehow. Right away. That devilish stuff! Can you get hold of a bit of
the antidote?" he asked abruptly. "The merest drop of it?"
She shook her head.
"No, Senhor. It is given in food, in wine. One never knows that one
has had it. It is tasteless, and we have only Senhor Ribiera's word
that it has been given."
Bell's hands clenched.
"So devilish clever.... What are we going to do?"
The girl stuffed the corner of her handkerchief into her mouth.
"I am thinking of my little baby," she said, choking. "I must persuade
you, Senhor. I--I have been tearful. I--I am not attractive. I will
try. If I am not attractive to you...."
  *  *  *  *  *
Bell cursed, deeply and savagely. It seemed to be the only possible
thing to do. And then he spoke coldly.
"Listen to me, Senhora. Ribiera talked frankly to me just now. He
knows that so far I am not subdued. If I escape he cannot blame you.
He cannot! And I am going to attempt it. If you will follow me...."
"There is no escape for me," she said dully, "and if he thinks that I
knew of your escape and did not tell him...."
"Follow me," said Bell, smiling queerly. "I shall take care that he
does not suspect it."
He gazed about for an instant, orienting himself. The plane that had
just landed--the last of a dozen or more that had arrived in the past
two days--had dipped down on the private landing field to the north.
There was a beautifully kept way running from the landing field to the
house, and he went on through the thick shrubbery amid a labyrinth of
paths, choosing the turnings most likely to lead him to it.
  *  *  *  *  *
He came out upon it suddenly, and faced toward the field. There were
two men coming toward the house, on foot. One was a flying pilot,
still in his flying clothes. The other was a tall man, for a
Brazilian, with the lucent clarity of complexion that bespeaks
uncontaminated white descent. He was white-haired, and his face was
queerly tired, as if he were exhausted.
Bell looked sharply. He seemed to see a resemblance to someone he knew
in the tall man. He spoke quickly to the girl beside him.
"Who is the man to the left?"
"Senhor Canalejas," said the girl drearily. "He is the Minister of
War. I suppose he, too...."
Bell drew a deep breath. He walked on, confidently. As the two others
drew near he said apologetically:
"Senhores."
They halted with the instinctive, at least surface, courtesy of the
Brazilian. And Bell was fumbling with his handkerchief, rather
nervously tying a knot in it. He held it out to Canalejas.
"Observe."
It was, of course, a recognition-knot such as may be given to an
outsider by one in the Trade. The tall man's face changed. And Bell
swung swiftly and suddenly and very accurately to the point of the
other man's jaw.
He collapsed.
  *  *  *  *  *
"Senhor Canalejas," said Bell politely, "I am about to go and steal an
airplane to take what I have learned to my companion for transmission.
If you wish to go with me...."
Canalejas stared for the fraction of a second. Then he said quietly:
"But of course."
He turned to retrace his steps. Bell turned to the girl.
"If you are wise," he said gently, "you will go and give the alarm. If
you are kind, you will delay it as much as you dare."
She regarded him in agonized doubt for a moment, and nodded. She fled.
"Now," said Bell casually, "I think we had better hasten. And I hope,
Senhor Canalejas, that you have a revolver. We will need one. Mine has
been ruined."
Without a word, the white-haired man drew out a weapon and offered it
to him.
"I had intended," he said very calmly, "to kill the Senhor Ribiera.
His last demand is for my daughter."
They went swiftly. The plane Bell had seen alight some fifteen or
twenty minutes before was just being approached by languid mechanics.
It was, of course, still warm. Canalejas shouted and waved his arm
imperiously. It is probable that he gave the impression of a man
returning for some forgotten thing, left in the cockpit of the plane.
  *  *  *  *  *
What happened then, happened quickly. A few crisp words in a low tone.
A minor hubbub began suddenly back at the house. Canalejas climbed
into the passenger's seat as if looking for something. And Bell
presented his now useless automatic pleasantly at the head of the
nearest staring mechanic, and while he froze in horror, scrambled up
into the pilot's cockpit.
"Contact!" he snapped, and turned on the switch. The mechanic remained
frozen with fear. "Damnation!" said Bell savagely. "I don't know the
Portuguese for 'Turn her over'!"
He fumbled desperately about in the cockpit. Something whirred. The
propeller went over.... Canalejas shot with painstaking accuracy,
twice. The motor caught with a spluttering roar.
As a horde of running figures, servants and guests, running with the
same desperation, came plunging out on the flying field from the
shrubbery. Bell gave the motor the gun. The fast little plane's tail
came up off the ground as she darted forward. Faster and faster, with
many bumpings. The bumpings ceased. She was clear.
And Bell zoomed suddenly to lift her over the racing, fear-ridden
creatures who clutched desperately at the wheels, and then the little
ship shot ahead, barely cleared the trees to the east of the field,
and began to roar at her topmost speed toward Rio.
CHAPTER V
The Trade--which does not exist--has its obligations and its code, but
also it has its redeeming features. When a man has finished his job,
he has finished it. And as far as the Trade was concerned, Bell had
but little more to do. But after that--and his eyes burned smokily in
their depths--there was much that he intended to do. He sat in one of
the _bondes_ of the Botanical Garden half of the street railway system
of Rio, and absent mindedly regarded the scenery. This particular
_bonde_ was headed out toward the Lagoa Rodrigo de Freitas, by which
salty mass of water Bell would meet Paula Canalejas. He would receive
a package from her, which he would deliver to Jamison. And then he
would be free, and it was his private intention to engage in an
enterprise which was very probably a form of suicide. But there are
some things one cannot dismiss with a sage reflection that they are
not one's business. This matter of Ribiera was definitely one of them.
  *  *  *  *  *
The escape from Ribiera's _fazenda_ had been relatively easy, because
so thoroughly unexpected. The little plane had climbed to five
thousand feet and found a stratum of cloud that stretched for very
many miles. Bell had emerged from it only twice in the first hour of
flight, and the second time the sky was clear all about him. That he
was pursued, he had no doubt. That Ribiera had wireless communications
with Rio, he knew. And he knew that instant, and imperative orders
would have gone out for his capture.
Rio would not be a healthy place for him. If Ribiera had power over
high government officials, he had surely indirect power over the
police, and a search for Bell would be in order at once. Yet Canalejas
assuredly expected to return to Rio.
A shouted question with the motor cut out, and a nodded answer. Bell
headed for Petropolis, which is Rio's only real summer resort and is
high in the hills and only an hour and a half from it by train. It was
surprisingly satisfactory to be handling a swift plane again, and Bell
allowed himself what he knew was about the only pleasure he was likely
to have for some time to come.
Something of his hatred of Ribiera, however, came back as he prepared
to land. He managed to crack the plane up very neatly, so that it
would be of no use to Ribiera any more. And at the same time, of
course, the cracking-up provided an excellent excuse for Canalejas to
continue on by train.
  *  *  *  *  *
They talked very briefly by the puffing engine.
"It is best," said Canalejas, "for you, Senhor, to remain here
overnight. I believe Senhor Ribiera has given orders for us both to be
looked for, yet as a Cabinet Minister I am still immune from arrest by
the ordinary police. If I reach my home I shall be able to do all that
is necessary."
"And you will prepare a message for me to carry," said Bell.
"It is ready," said Canalejas. He smiled faintly. "No, Senhor. I have
instructions to give my daughter. She will deliver the information to
you to-morrow. Let me see. At the edge of the Lagao Rodrigo de
Feitas, at nine o'clock. She is the only messenger I can trust. I
think that is all."
Bell hesitated uncomfortably.
"But you, sir," he said awkwardly. "You have been poisoned, as Senor
Ortiz was."
"But certainly," said Canalejas. His smile was ironic as before. "But,
unlike Senor Ortiz, I have no hope. I have arranged for my daughter to
conceal herself and escape from Brazil. I have prepared for
everything, Senhor. As you know, I had intended to kill Senhor
Ribiera. In returning with you I have merely delayed my own death by a
few hours."
Still smiling, and with the air of one entering a train for the most
casual of journeys, Canalejas entered the coach.
  *  *  *  *  *
And Bell, sitting in the _bonde_ next morning, saw with an uncanny
clarity the one weak point in Ribiera's hold upon his subjects. When
they had courage to fear nothing more than death, they could defy him.
And not many could attain to that courage. But a few....
"I'll have some help, anyway," muttered Bell savagely to himself.
It is a long ride to the Botanical Gardens, from which one half the
surface lines of Rio take their name. On the way out to the Lagao
Rodrigo de Feitas, which, is close by the Garden itself, Bell had time
to work over for the thousandth time the information he possessed, and
realize its uselessness. Two things, only, might be of service. One
was that Ribiera was the nephew of the person referred to as The
Master, and yet was evidently as much subjected to him as his own
victims to himself. The other was that the ultimate end of all the
ghastly scheme was in some fashion political. If wealth alone had been
Ribiera's aim, the gathering of his slaves would have had a different
aspect. The majority of them would have been rich men, men of
business, men who could pay out hundreds of thousands a month in the
desperate hope of being permitted to remain sane. There would not have
been politicians and officials and officers of the army.
"The key men of the country," growled Bell inaudibly, "enslaved to
Ribiera. They give him the power he's after more than cash. And it's
those key men who have more to lose than money. There's such a thing
as honor...."
Three times the conductor stopped beside him and suggestively rattled
the coins in his box. Three times Bell absent mindedly paid the fare
for the zone. But the ride is a long one, and he had had time to
realize the hopelessness of any single-handed attack upon the thing he
faced long before the end.
Then he absently moved through the amazing collection of tropic and
near tropic growths that is the Botanical Garden until he came at once
to Paula and the Lagoa Rodrico de Freitas.
  *  *  *  *  *
It was alive with birds, and they hopped and pecked and squabbled
without acrimony within feet of her seated figure. Bell knew that she
had been waiting for a long time. He looked quickly at her face. It
was quite pale, but entirely tearless.
"Here is the message, Senhor Bell," she said quietly, "but I think I
have been followed."
Bell growled in his throat.
"I did not discover it until I reached this spot," she said evenly.
"And I did not know what to do. If I left, I would be seized and the
message taken--and I think that someone would have waited here for
you. So, in part to gain time, and in part because I hoped you might
have some resource, I remained."
"How many of them?" asked Bell shortly.
"Two," she said quietly. She looked at him, her large eyes entirely
calm and grave.
"Give me the package," said Bell briefly. "They'll be more anxious to
get it back than to bother you. And I'll either knock them cold or
hold them in a scrap until you get away."
She reached in her pocket and handed him a small thick envelope. He
stuffed it in the side pocket of his coat.
"I will walk away," he observed, "and they'll follow me. Can you
arrange to give me some sign that you're safe?"
"By the gateway," she told him. "My handkerchief. I shall start as
soon as you have vanished. If I am followed, I will drop this
handkerchief, as it is. If I am not followed, I will tie a knot. But
what can you do?"
"I'll do something," said Bell coldly. "Something!"
  *  *  *  *  *
She smiled, with the same odd bitterness her father had shown.
"My father--shot himself," she said briefly. "I have no particular
hope of doing better. But I shall not be Ribiera's slave."
She remained quite still. Bell moved away. He hurried. There was thick
jungle ahead, a section of the Gardens that is painstakingly preserved
untouched and undisturbed, that visitors to the capital of Brazil may
observe a typical sample of the virgin interior. He dived into that
jungle as if in flight.
And very shortly after, two men dived in after him. They hesitated,
these men, because your policeman of Rio does not like to injure his
uniform, and there are many thorns in jungle growths. But they entered
it, having first drawn small glittering weapons. And then from the
jungle came silence.
  *  *  *  *  *
It seemed to be silence. But there may have been some small unusual
noises. It would not be easy to tell if they were unusual or not,
because there are peculiar flashes of charm in certain Brazilian
institutions. The preservation of the spot of jungle itself is one.
Another is the fact that in the Gardens all manner of wild things
live at large and provide unexpected and delightful surprises to the
usually foreign visitors.
So there were noises, after a bit. Such noises as some grunting wild
thing might have made, perhaps. But they might also have been the
gasping of a man as breath was choked out of him.... And there was a
cracking sound a little later, which might--of course--have been any
one of any number of accidental and perfectly natural causes. And it
might have been a man upon whom another man had hurled himself, when
the second man landed on his jaw. And thrashing noises a little later
might have been anything.
But after what seemed a long time, Bell emerged. Alone. He was
breathing quickly, and there were scratches on his face and hands
which--well, which might have been made by thorns. He went swiftly
back toward the spot where Paula had waited. He looked cautiously. She
was gone.
And then Bell went leisurely, in the studious fashion of a person
going through the Botanical Gardens because it was the thing to do,
toward the gateway and the surface cars. As he neared the gate his
eyes roved with apparent casualness all about. He saw a tiny speck of
white on the edge of the roadway. It looked as if it had been flung
from a car. Bell picked it up. It was Paula's handkerchief, and there
was no knot whatever in it. In fact, its lacy edge was torn.
"They've got her," said Bell, apparently unmoved.
  *  *  *  *  *
He waited for a car. A bulky figure wearing thick spectacles came
placidly from the Gardens. It waited, also, for the car. The car
arrived, in its two sections of first and second class; the first
reserved for _cavalhieros_, which is to say persons wearing coat,
shirt, collar, necktie, hat, shoes and socks, and carrying no parcel
larger than a brief case. Lesser folk who lacked any of the sartorial
requirements for admission to the first class section, or wore
_tomancos_ instead of shoes, heaped themselves into the second section
and paid one-third of the fare in the first.
Bell took his seat in the first section. It was comfortably filled.
The bulky person with the thick spectacles wedged himself carefully
into the space beside Bell. He unfolded a copy of the _Jornal do
Commercio_ and began to regard the advertisements. Presently he found
what he was looking for. "_O Bicho_," said medium-sized type. Beside
it was a picture of a kangaroo. The gentleman with the thick
spectacles resignedly fished into his pockets and found a lottery
ticket. He tore it into scraps and threw them away. Then he began to
gaze disinterestedly at the scenery and the other passengers in the
car.
  *  *  *  *  *
Bell drummed on his knee. With one's forefinger representing a dot,
and one's second finger serving as a dash, it is surprising how
naturally and absentmindedly one may convey a perfectly intelligible
message to a man sitting within a reasonable distance. When the man is
alongside, the matter is absurdly simple.
Presently the man with the thick lenses got out his paper again, as if
bored by vistas such as no other city in the world can offer. His
paper was in the pocket which pressed against Bell. If in getting out
his newspaper he also abstracted a thick fat envelope from Bell's
pocket and placed it in his own, and if all this took place under a
sign--even in the section reserved for _cavalhieros_ of approved
raiment--solemnly warning passengers against "_batadores de
carteiras_," or pickpockets--well, it was an ironical coincidence
whose humor Bell did not see.
He was busily tapping out on his knee the briefest possible account of
what he had learned at Ribiera's _fazenda_ up country.
"_One chance for me_," he tapped off at the end. "_If I can kidnap
Ribiera I can make him talk. Somehow. He has big amphibian plane kept
fueled and ready for long trip. I think he is back in Rio to direct
hunt for me. Paula kidnapped. My job finished. On my own now._"
The man with thick spectacles did not nod. He seemed to be looking
idly at his paper, but it was folded at an article very discreetly
phrased, beneath a photograph of Senhor Teixeira Canalejas, Minister
of War, who had very unfortunately been found dead that morning. He
had been depressed, of late, but there were certain circumstances
which made it as yet impossible to determine whether he had killed
himself or was the victim of an assassin.
"_Getting set for me_," tapped Bell grimly on his knee. "_Ribiera told
me too much._"
  *  *  *  *  *
The man with thick spectacles yawned and turned the paper over. Under
a smaller headline--which would only find a place on a Brazilian
sheet--"A Regrettable Incident"--an item of more direct importance was
printed. It told of an unnamed Senhor from the United States of the
North America, who as the guest of a widely known Brazilian gentleman
had behaved most boorishly, had stolen an airplane from his host and
broken it to bits on landing unskilfully, and had vanished with
priceless heirlooms belonging to his host. It read, virtuously:
 No names are mentioned because the American Senhor has been
 widely introduced in Rio society as a person with an
 official status in Washington. It is understood that an
 inquiry is to be made of the Ambassador as to the status of
 the young man, before any action is taken by the police. It
 is to be expected, however, that he will at least be
 requested to leave the country.
Bell managed the barest flicker of a smile. Arrest, of course.
Detention, most courteously arranged, while the Ambassador was
communicated with. And Ribiera.
"_Give me dismiss_," he tapped on his knee.
The gentleman in the thick spectacles ran his finger thoughtfully
about the edge of his collar. In the Trade that is a signal of many
varied meanings. A hand across the throat in any fashion means, "Clear
out, your job is finished," "Save your skin as best you can," and "Get
away without trying to help me," according to circumstances. In this
case it relieved Bell of all future responsibility.
He yawned, tapping his lips with the back of his hand, signaled for a
stop of the car, and got out. Five minutes later he had signaled a
taxicab and given Ribiera's address. In six minutes he was being
whirled toward the one house in all Rio de Janeiro from which his
chance of a safe departure was slightest. In little more than half an
hour he had dismissed the cab and was gazing placidly into the
startled eyes of the doorman. The doorman, like all of Rio where
Ribiera was known and feared, knew that Bell was being hunted.
Bell handed over his card with an inscrutable air.
"The Senhor Ribiera," he said drily, "returned to the city last night.
Present my card and say that I would like to speak to him."
  *  *  *  *  *
The doorman ushered him inside and summoned the major-domo, still
blinking his amazement. And the major-domo blinked again. But Bell
followed with the air of an habitué, as he was again ushered into the
luxurious salon in which he had once been offered a drugged drink.
Again he sank down in a softly padded chair and surveyed the pictures
and the minor objects of decadent art about him. Again he lighted a
cigarette with every appearance of ease, and again had the impression
of eyes upon him. The major-domo appeared, somewhat agitated.
"The Senhor Ribiera," he said harshly, "will see you only if you are
not armed. He requires your word of honor."
Bell smiled lazily.
"I'll do better than that," he said languidly. "I haven't had time to
buy a revolver. But the automatic he had put out of commission is in
my pocket. Present it to him with my compliments."
He handed over the weapon, butt first. The major-domo blinked, and
took it. Bell sat down and smiled widely. He had been expected to be
uproarious, to attempt to force the major-domo to lead him to Ribiera.
And, of course, he would have been led past a perfectly planned ambush
for his capture--but he might have killed the major-domo. Which would
not disturb Ribiera, but had disturbed the servant.
  *  *  *  *  *
Bell smoked comfortably. And suddenly hangings parted, and Ribiera
came into the room. He smiled nervously, and then, as Bell blew a puff
of smoke at him and nodded casually, he scowled.
"I came," said Bell deliberately, "to make a bargain. Frankly, I do
not like to break my word. I was under obligations to deliver a
package from Senhor Canalejas to a certain messenger who will take it
to my government. I have done it. But I am not, Senhor Ribiera, a
member of the Secret Service. I am entirely a free agent now, and I am
prepared to consider your proposals, which I could not in honor do
before."
He smiled pleasantly. Effrontery, properly managed, is one of the most
valuable of all qualities. Especially in dealing with people who
themselves are arrogant when they dare.
  *  *  *  *  *
Ribiera purpled with rage, and then controlled it.
"Ah!" he rumbled. "You are prepared to consider my proposals. There
are no proposals. The Master may be amused at your cleverness in
escaping. I do not know. I do know that I am ordered to make you my
slave and send you to The Master. That, I shall do."
"Perhaps," said Bell blandly: "but I can go without food and drink for
several days, which will delay the process. And while I cannot
honorably tell you how to stop the man bearing Senhor Canalejas'
package to my government, still ... If I willingly accepted a dose of
_yagué_ in token of my loyalty to The Master...."
Ribiera's good humor returned. He chuckled.
"You actually mean," he said jovially, "that you think you were given
some of The Master's little compound, and that you wish to make terms
before your hands begin to writhe at the ends of your wrists. Is not
that your reason?"
Bell's eyes flickered. He had been horribly afraid of just that. But
Ribiera's amusement was reassuring.
"Perhaps," said Bell. "Perhaps I am."
  *  *  *  *  *
Ribiera sat down and stretched his fat legs in front of him. He
surveyed Bell with an obscene, horrible amusement.
"Ah, Senhor," he chuckled, "some day we will laugh together over this!
You yet hope, and do not yet know how much better it will be for you
if you cease to hope, and cultivate desires! The Master is pleased
with you. You have just those qualities he knows are necessary in
dealing with your nation. He is not angry with you. It is his
intention to use you to extend his--ah--influence among the officials
of your nation. You know, of course, that in but a little more time I
will hold all Brazil--as I now hold this city--in the hollow of my
hand. Four of the republics of this continent are already completely
under the control of The Master's deputies, and of the rest, Brazil is
not the most nearly subdued. A year or two, and The Master will
become Emperor, and his deputies viceroys. And it is his whim to give
you the opportunity of becoming the first deputy and the first viceroy
of North America. And you come to me and offer--you, Senhor!--to make
terms! I believe even The Master will laugh when he hears of it."
"But," said Bell practically, "do you accept my terms?"
Ribiera chuckled again.
"What are they, Senhor?"
"That you release the daughter of the Senhor Canalejas and pledge your
word of honor that she will not be enslaved."
  *  *  *  *  *
Ribiera's word of honor, of course, would be worth rather less than
the breath that was used to give it. But his reception of the proposal
would be informative.
He chuckled again.
"No, Senhor. I do not accept. But I will promise you as a favor,
because my uncle The Master admires you, that within a few weeks you
shall enjoy her charms. I do not," he added with amused candor, "find
that any one woman diverts me for a very long time."
"Oh," said Bell, very quietly.
He sat still for an instant, and then shrugged, and looked about as if
for an ash tray in which to knock the ashes from his cigarette. He
stood up, carrying the tube of tobacco gingerly, and moved toward one
by Ribiera's elbow. He knocked off the ash, and crushed out the tiny
coal. He fumbled in his pockets.
The next instant Ribiera choked with terror.
"Let me explain," said Bell softly. "I did not give your major-domo my
word that I was unarmed. I merely gave him a weapon. I got these from
two policemen who tried to arrest me an hour or so ago. And I also
remind you, Senhor, that if the armed men you have posted to prevent
my escape try to shoot me, that the inevitable contraction of my
muscles will send two bullets into your heart--even if I am dead. I
am a dead man, Senhor, if you give the word, but so are you if you
give it."
Ribiera gasped. His eyes rolled in his head.
"Send for her," said Bell very gently. "Send for her, Senhor. I
estimate that she has been in this house for less than half an hour.
Have her brought here at once, and if she has been harmed the three of
us will perish very promptly, and half of Rio will go mad after our
death."
And the muzzles of two revolvers bored into the fat flesh of Ribiera's
body, and a gasp that was almost a wail of terror came from the
watchers--armed watchers--who dared not kill the man they had been
posted to guard Ribiera against.
Ribiera lifted his hand and croaked an order.
(_To be continued._)
[Advertisement:]
Brigands of the Moon
(The Book of Gregg Haljan)
PART THREE OF A FOUR-PART NOVEL
_By Ray Cummings_
[Illustration: Light-rays and silent flashes seemed to envelop us.]
[Sidenote: Gregg and Anita risk quick, sure death in a desperate bluff
on the ruthless Martian brigands.]
_WHAT HAS GONE BEFORE_
One day in 2075 the Interplanetary Space-Ship _Planetara_ left the
Earth for Mars. I, Gregg Haljan, was third officer.
It was destined to be a tragic voyage. For in our midst were
unscrupulous brigands, masquerading as harmless passengers, intent on
seizing the secret treasure of radium ore Johnny Grantline of the
Grantline Expedition had dug from the Moon. The _Planetara_ was to
stop on the Moon and pick the treasure up on her return trip from
Mars.
Miko, a giant Martian, and his sister, Moa, were the ringleaders. With
them were, as passengers, Sir Arthur Coniston and Ob Hahn, a Venus
mystic. The whole crew was in their pay.
Miko struck. The captain was killed, as were the officers. Only Snap
Dean, the radio-helio operator, Venza, a girl of Venus, and I were
left. And, of course, Anita Prince, who had captivated my heart upon
my first glimpse of her.
The brigands abandoned the other passengers on a small asteroid, and
Miko signaled his space-ship far off on Mars to meet him on the Moon.
I was forced to guide the _Planetara_ to the Moon. We sighted the huts
of the Grantline Expedition, and suddenly, just as we started to
descend, the controls, snapped, and the _Planetara_ tumbled like a
spent rocket! Desperately I tried to check her, but only partially
succeeded. We crashed horribly against the barren gray rock of the
Moon. Anita, Venza, Snap and I lived through it, but we could not find
the bodies of Miko and Moa in the wreckage. Evidently they were still
alive, somewhere.
We reached Johnny Grantline. The _Planetara_ was a complete wreck.
And, speeding to us from Mars, was Miko's brigand ship.
We were powerless--without means of leaving the Moon--and completely
at the mercy of Miko's fast approaching brigands!
CHAPTER XXIII
_The Prowling Watchman_
"Try it again," Snap urged. "Good God, Johnny, we've got to raise some
Earth station! Chance it! Use your power--run it up to the full.
Chance it!"
We were gathered in Grantline's instrument room. The duty-man, with
blanched grim face, sat at his senders. The Grantline crew shoved
close around us, tense and silent.
Above everything we must make some Earth station aware of our plight.
Conditions were against us. There were very few observers, in the
high-powered Earth stations who knew that an exploring party was on
the Moon. Perhaps none of them. The Government officials who had
sanctioned the expedition--and Halsey and his confrères in the
Detective Bureau--were not anticipating trouble now. The _Planetara_
was supposed to be well on her course to Ferrok-Shahn. It was when she
was due to return that Halsey would be alert.
And it seemed, too, that nature was against us. The bulging
half-Earth[1] hung poised near the zenith over our little crater. Its
rotation through the hours was clearly visible. We timed our signals
when the western hemisphere was facing us. But nature was against us.
No clouds, no faintest hint of mist could fog the airless Lunar
surface. But there were continuous clouds over the Americas.
[Footnote 1: Between the half and the full illumined disc, the
complete Earth now was some ten days old.]
"Try it again," Snap urged.
  *  *  *  *  *
These bulging walls! Grantline used his power far beyond the limits of
safety. He cut down his lights; the telescope intensifiers were
permanently disconnected; the ventilators were momentarily stilled, so
that the air here in the little room crowded with men rapidly grew
fetid. All to save power pressure, that the vital Erentz system might
survive.
Even so it was strained to the danger point. The walls seemed to bulge
outward with the pressure of the room, the aluminite braces straining
and creaking. And our heat was radiating away; the deadly chill of
space crept in.
"Again!" ordered Grantline.
The duty-man flung on the power in rhythmic pulses. In the silence the
tubes hissed. The light sprang through the banks of rotating prisms,
intensified up the scale until, with a vague, almost invisible beam,
it left the last swaying mirror and leaped through our overhead dome
into space.
"Commander!" The duty-man's voice carried an appeal. These bulging
walls! If they cracked, or even sprung a serious leak, the camp would
be uninhabitable....
"Enough," said Grantline. "Switch it off. We'll let it go at that for
now."
It seemed that every man in the room had been holding his breath in
the darkness. The lights came on again: the Erentz motors accelerated
to normal. The strain on the walls eased up, and the room began
warming.
Had the Earth caught our signal? We did not want to waste the power to
find out. Our receivers were disconnected. If an answering signal
came, we could not know it. One of the men said:
"Let's assume they saw us." He laughed, but it was a high-pitched,
tense laugh. "We don't dare even use the telescope. Our rescue ship
will be right overhead, visible to the naked eye before we see it.
Three days more--that's what I'll give it."
  *  *  *  *  *
But the three days passed, and no rescue ship came. The Earth was
almost at the full. We tried signaling again. Perhaps it got
through--we did not know. But our power was weaker now. The wall of
one of the rooms sprang a leak, and the men were hours repairing it. I
did not say so, but never once did I feel that our signals were seen
on Earth. Those cursed clouds! The Earth almost everywhere seemed to
have poor visibility.
Four of our eight days of grace were all too soon passed. The brigand
ship must be half-way here by now.
They were busy days for us. If we could have captured Miko and his
band, our danger would have been less imminent. With the treasure
insulated so that its Gamma rays could not betray us, and our camp in
darkness, the arriving brigand ship might never find us. But Miko knew
our location: he would signal his oncoming ship when it was close and
lead it to us.
Three times during those days--and the days which followed
them--Grantline sent out searching parties. But it was unavailing.
Miko, Moa and Coniston, with their five underlings, could not be
found. We searched all the territory from the camp to the _Planetara_,
and off to the foot-crags of Archimedes, and a score of miles into the
flatness of the Mare Imbrium. There was no sign of the brigands. Yet
we knew they could be near here--it was so easy to hide amid the
tumbled crags, the ravines, the gullies, the numberless craters and
pit-holes: or underground in the vast honeycombed subterranean
recesses.
  *  *  *  *  *
We had at first hoped that the brigands might have perished. But that
was soon dispelled! I went--about the third day--with the party that
was sent to the _Planetara_. We wanted to salvage such of its
equipment, its unbroken power units, as might be available. And Snap
and I had worked out an idea which we thought might be of service. We
needed some of the _Planetara's_ smaller gravity-plate sections. Those
in Grantline's wrecked little _Comet_ had stood so long that their
radiations had gone dead. But the _Planetara's_ were still
efficacious.
We secured the fragments of Newtonia.[2] But our hope that Miko might
have perished was dashed. He too had returned to the _Planetara_! The
evidence was clear before us. The vessel was stripped of all its power
units save those which were dead and useless. The last of the food and
water stores was taken. The weapons in the chart-room--the Benson
curve-lights, bullet projectors, and heat-rays--had vanished.
[Footnote 2: An allusion to the element Newtonia, named in memory of
the great founder of celestial mechanics, Sir Isaac Newton.
Artificially electronized, this metal element may be charged either
positively or negatively, thus to attract or repell other masses of
matter. The gravity plates of all space-ships were built of it.]
Other days passed. The Earth reached the full, and began waning. The
twenty-eight day Lunar night was in its last half. No rescue ship came
from Earth. We had ceased our efforts to signal, for we needed all our
power to maintain ourselves. The camp would be in a state of siege.
That was the best we could hope for. We had a few short-range weapons,
such as Bensons, heat-rays and rifles. A few hundred feet of effective
range was the most any of them could obtain. The heat-rays--in giant
form one of the most deadly weapons on Earth--were only slowly
efficacious on the airless Moon. Striking an intensely cold surface,
their warming radiations, without atmosphere to aid them, were slow
to act. Even in a blasting heat-beam a man in his Erentz helmet-suit
could withstand the ray for several minutes.
  *  *  *  *  *
We were, however, well equipped with explosives. Grantline had brought
a large supply for his mining operations, and much of it was still
unused. We had, also, an ample stock of oxygen fuses, and a variety of
oxygen light flares in small fragile glass-globes.
It was to use these explosives against the brigands that Snap and I
were working out our scheme with the gravity-plates. The brigand ship
would come with giant projectors and with some thirty men. If we could
hold out against them for a time, the fact that the _Planetara_ was
missing would bring us help from Earth.
"A month," said Grantline. "A month at the most. If we can hold them
off that long--even in a week or two help may come."
Another day. A tenseness fell on us all, despite the absorption of our
feverish activities. To conserve the power, the camp was almost dark,
we lived in dim, chill rooms, with just a few weak spots of light
outside to mark the watchmen on their rounds. We did not use the
telescope,[3] but there was scarcely an hour when one or the other of
the men was not sitting on a cross-piece up in the dome of the little
instrument room, casting tense searching gaze into the black, starry
firmament. A ship might appear at any time now--a rescue ship from
Earth, or the brigands from Mars.
  *  *  *  *  *
Anita and Venza during these days could aid us very little save by
their cheering words. They moved about the rooms, trying to inspire
us; so that all the men, when they might have been humanly sullen and
cursing their fate, were turned to grim activity, or grim laughter,
making a joke of this coming siege. The morale of the camp now was
perfect. An improvement indeed over the inactivity of the former
peaceful weeks!
[Footnote 3: An old-fashioned telescope, of limited field and needing
no electronic power, would have been immensely serviceable to
Grantline, but his was of the more modern type.]
Grantline mentioned it to me. "We'll put up a good fight, Haljan.
These fellows from Mars will know they've had a task before they ever
sail off with this treasure."
I had many moments alone with Anita. I need not mention them. It
seemed that our love was crossed by the stars, with an adverse fate
dooming it. And Snap and Venza must have felt the same. Among the men
we were always quietly, grimly active. But alone.... I came upon Snap
once with his arms around the little Venus girl. I heard him say:
"Accursed luck! That you and I should find each other too late, Venza.
We could have a mighty lot of fun in Great-New York together."
"Snap, we will!"
As I turned away, I murmured: "And, pray God, so will Anita and I."
The girls slept together in a small room of the main building. Often
during the time of sleep, when the camp was stilled except for the
night watch, Snap and I would sit in the corridor near the girls'
door-grid, talking of that time when we would all be back on our
blessed Earth.
  *  *  *  *  *
Our eight days of grace were passed. The brigand ship was due--now,
to-morrow, or the next day.
I recall, that night, my sleep was fitfully uneasy. Snap and I had a
cubby together. We talked, and made futile plans. I went to sleep, but
awakened after a few hours. Impending disaster lay heavily on me. But
there was nothing abnormal nor unusual in that!
Snap was asleep. I was restless, but I did not have the heart to
awaken him. He needed what little repose he could get. I dressed, left
our cubby and wandered out into the corridor of the main building.
It was cold in the corridor, and gloomy with the weak blue light. An
interior watchman passed me.
"All as usual, Haljan."
"Nothing in sight?"
"No. They're looking."
I went through the connecting corridor to the adjacent building. In
the instrument-room several of the men were gathered, scanning the
vault overhead.
"Nothing, Haljan."
I stayed with them awhile, then wandered away. The outside man met me
near the admission lock-chambers of the main building. The duty-man
here sat at his controls, raising the air-pressure in the locks
through which the outside watchman was coming. The relief sat here in
his bloated suit, with his helmet on his knees. It was Wilks.
"Nothing yet, Haljan. I'm going up to the peak of the crater to see if
anything is in sight. I wish that damnable brigand ship would come and
get it over with."
Instinctively we all spoke in half whispers, the tenseness bearing in
on us.
The outside man came out of his helmet. He was white and grim, but he
grinned at Wilks.
"All is usual." He tried the familiar jest at Wilks, but his voice was
flat: "Don't let the Earthlight get you!"
Wilks went out through the portes--a process of no more than a minute.
I wandered away again through the corridors.
  *  *  *  *  *
I suppose it was half an hour later that I chanced to be gazing
through a corridor window. The lights along the rocky cliff-edge were
tiny blue spots. The head of the stairway leading down to the abyss of
the crater floor was visible. The bloated figure of Wilks was just
coming up. I watched him for a moment making his rounds. He did not
stop to inspect the lights. That was routine; I thought it queer that
he passed them.
Another minute passed. The figure of Wilks went with slow bounds over
toward the back of the ledge where the glassite shelter housed the
treasure. It was all dark off there. Wilks went into the gloom, but
before I lost sight of him he came back. As though he had changed his
mind he headed for the foot of the staircase which led up the
cliff-face to where, at the peak of the little crater, five hundred
feet above us, the narrow observatory platform was perched. He climbed
with easy bounds, the light on his helmet bobbing in the gloom.
I stood watching. I could not tell why there seemed to be something
queer about Wilks' actions. But I was struck with it, nevertheless. I
watched him disappear over the peak of the summit.
Another minute went by. Wilks did not reappear. I thought I could make
out his light on the platform up there. Then abruptly a tiny white
beam was waving from the observatory platform! It flashed once or
twice, then was extinguished. And now I saw Wilks plainly, standing in
the Earthlight, gazing down.
Queer actions! Had the Earthlight touched him? Or was that a local
signal-call which he had sent out? Why should Wilks be signalling?
What was he doing with a hand-helio? Our watchmen, I knew, had no
reason to carry one.
And to whom could Wilks be signalling across this Lunar desolation?
The answer stabbed at me: to Miko's band!
I waited another moment. No further light. Wilks was still up there!
  *  *  *  *  *
I went back to the lock entrance. Spare suits and helmets were here
beside the keeper. He gazed at me inquiringly.
"I'm going out, Franck, just for a minute." It struck me that perhaps
I was a meddlesome fool. Wilks, of all Grantline's men, was, I knew,
most in his commander's trust. The signal could have been some part of
this night's ordinary routine, for all I knew.
I was hastily donning an Erentz suit. I added, "Let me out. I just got
the idea Wilks is acting queerly." I laughed. "Maybe the Earthlight
has touched him."
With my helmet on I went through the locks. Once outside, with the
outer panel closed behind me, I dropped the weights from my belt and
shoes and extinguished my helmet-light.
Wilks was still up there. Apparently he had not moved. I bounded off
across the ledge to the foot of the ascending stairs. Did Wilks see me
coming? I could not tell. As I approached the stairs the platform was
cut off from my line of vision.
I mounted with bounding leaps. In my flexible gloved hand I carried my
only weapon, a small bullet projector with oxygen firing caps for use
in this outside near-vacuum. The leaden bullet with its slight mass
would nevertheless pierce a man at the distance of twenty feet.
I held the weapon behind me. I would talk to Wilks first.
I went slowly up the last hundred feet. Was Wilks still up there? The
summit was bathed in Earthlight. The little metal observatory platform
came into view above my head.
Wilks was not there. Then I saw him standing on the rocks nearby,
motionless. But in a moment he saw me coming.
I waved my left arm with a gesture of greeting. It seemed to me that
he started, made as though to leap away, then changed his mind and
waited for me.
I sailed from the head of the staircase with a twenty-foot leap and
landed lightly beside him. I gripped his arm for audiphone contact.
"Wilks!"
Through the visors his face was visible. I saw him, and he saw me. And
I heard his voice.
"You, Haljan! How nice!"
It was not Wilks, but the brigand Coniston!
CHAPTER XXIV
_Imprisoned!_
The duty-man at the exit locks of the main building stood at his
window and watched me curiously. He saw me go up the spider-stairs. He
could see the figure he thought was Wilks, standing at the top. He saw
me join Wilks, saw us locked together in combat.
For an instant the duty-man stood amazed. There were two fantastic,
misshapen figures swaying in the Earthlight five hundred feet above
the camp, fighting desperately at the very brink. They were small,
dwarfed by distance, alternately dim and bright as they swayed in and
out of the shadows. Soon the duty-man could not tell one from the
other. Haljan and Wilks--fighting to the death!
The duty-man recovered himself and sprang into action. An interior
siren-call was on the instrument panel near him. He rang it, alarming
the camp.
The men came rushing to him, Grantline among them.
"What's this? Good God, Franck!"
They saw the silent, deadly combat up there on the cliff. The two
figures had fallen together from the observatory platform, dropped
twenty feet to a lower landing on the stairs. They lay as though
stunned for a moment, then fought on.
Grantline stood stricken with amazement. "That's Wilks!"
"And Haljan," the duty-man gasped. "Went out--something wrong with
Wilks--acting strangely--"
The interior of the camp was in a turmoil. The men awakened from
sleep, ran out into the corridors, shouted questions.
"An attack?"
"Is it an attack?"
"The brigands?"
  *  *  *  *  *
But it was Wilks and Haljan in a fight out there on the cliff. The men
crowded at the bulls'-eye windows.
And over all the confusion the alarm siren, with no one thinking to
shut it off, was screaming with its electrical voice.
Grantline, stricken for that moment of inactivity, stood gazing. One
of the figures broke away from the other, bounded up to the summit
from the stair-platform to which they had fallen. The other followed.
They locked together, swaying at the brink. For an instant it seemed
to Grantline that they would go over; then they surged back,
momentarily out of sight.
Grantline found his wits. "Stop them! I'll go out to stop them! What
fools!"
He was hastily donning one of the Erentz suits which stood at the lock
entrance. "Shut off that siren, Franck!"
Within a minute Grantline was ready. The duty-man called from the
window:
"Still at it! By the infernal, such fools! They'll kill themselves!"
The figures had swayed back into view, then out of sight again.
"Franck, let me out."
Grantline was ready. He stood, helmet in hand.
"I'll go with you, Commander."
But the volunteer was not equipped. Grantline would not wait.
"I'm going at once. Hurry, Franck."
The duty-man turned to his panel. The volunteer shoved a weapon at
Grantline. "Here, take this."
Grantline jammed on his helmet.
  *  *  *  *  *
He moved the few steps into the small air-chamber which was the first
of the three pressure locks. Its interior door-panel swung open for
him. But the door did not close after him!
Cursing the duty-man's slowness, he waited a few seconds. Then he
turned to the corridor. The duty-man came running.
Grantline took off his helmet. "What in hell--"
"Broken! Dead!"
"What!"
"Smashed from outside," gasped the duty-man. "Look there--my tubes--"
The control-tubes of the portes had flashed into a close-circuit and
burned out. The admission portes would not open!
"And the pressure controls smashed! Broken from outside--!"
There was no way now of getting out through these pressure-locks. The
doors, the entire pressure-lock system, was dead. Had it been tampered
with from outside?
As though to answer Grantline's amazed question there came a chorus of
shouts from the men at the corridor windows.
"Commander! By God--look!"
A figure was outside, close to the building! Clothed in suit and
helmet, it stood, bloated and gigantic. It had evidently been lurking
at the porte-entrance, had ripped out the wires there.
It moved past the windows, saw the staring faces of the men, and made
off with giant bounds. Grantline reached the window in time to see it
vanish around the building corner.
It was a giant figure, larger than a normal Earthman. A Martian?
  *  *  *  *  *
Up on the summit of the crater the two small figures were still
fighting. All this turmoil had taken no more than a minute or two.
A lurking Martian outside? The brigand, Miko? More than ever,
Grantline was determined to get out. He shouted to his men to don some
of the other suits, and called for some of the hand bullet projectors.
But he could not get out through these main admission portes. He could
have forced the panels open perhaps; but with the pressure-changing
mechanisms broken, it would merely let the air out of the corridor. A
rush of air, probably uncontrollable. How serious the damage was no
one could tell as yet. It would perhaps take hours to repair it.
Grantline was shouting. "Get those weapons! That's a Martian outside!
The brigand leader, probably! Get into your suits, anyone who wants to
go with me! We'll go by the manual emergency exit!"
But the prowling Martian had found it! Within a minute Grantline was
there. It was a smaller, two-lock gateway of manual control, so that
the person going out could operate it himself. It was in a corridor at
the other end of the main building. But Grantline was too late! The
lever would not open the panels!
Had someone gone out this way and broken the mechanisms after him? A
traitor in the camp? Or had someone come in from outside? Or had the
skulking Martian outside broken this lock as he had broken the other?
The questions surged on Grantline. His men crowded around him. The
news spread. The camp was a prison. No one could get out.
And outside, the skulking Martian had disappeared. But Wilks and
Haljan were still fighting. Grantline could see the two figures up on
the observatory platform. They bounded apart, then together again.
Crazily swaying--bouncing--striking the rail.
  *  *  *  *  *
They went together in a great leap off the platform onto the rocks,
and rolled in a bright patch of Earthlight. First one on top, then the
other, they rolled, unheeding, to the brink. Here, beyond the midway
ledge which held the camp, it was a sheer drop of a thousand feet, on
down to the crater-floor.
The figures were rolling: then one shook himself loose, rose up,
seized the other and, with a desperate lunge, shoved him--
The victorious figure drew back to safety. The other fell, hurtling
down into the shadows past the camp-level--down out of sight in the
darkness of the crater-floor.
Snap, who was in the group near Grantline at the windows, gasped.
"God! Was that Gregg Haljan who fell?"
No one could say. No one answered. Outside, on the camp-ledge, another
helmeted figure now became visible. It was not far from the main
building when Grantline first noticed it. It was running fast,
bounding toward the spider-staircase. It began mounting.
And now still another figure became visible--the giant Martian again.
He appeared from around the corner of the main Grantline building. He
evidently saw the winner of the combat on the cliff, who now was
standing in the Earthlight, gazing down. And he saw, too, no doubt,
the second figure mounting the stairs. He stood quite near the window
through which Grantline and his men were gazing, with his back to the
building, looking up to the summit. Then he ran with tremendous leaps
toward the ascending staircase.
Was it Haljan standing up there on the summit? Who was it climbing the
staircase? And was the third figure Miko?
Grantline's mind framed the questions. But his attention was torn from
them, and torn even from the swift silent drama outside. The corridor
was ringing with shouts.
"We're imprisoned! Can't get out! Was Haljan killed? The brigands are
outside!"
And then an interior audiphone blared a call for Grantline. Someone in
the instrument room of the adjoining building was talking:
"Commander, I tried the telescope to see who got killed--"
But he did not say who got killed, for he had greater news.
"Commander! The brigand ship!"
Miko's reinforcements from Mars had come.
CHAPTER XXV
_The Combat on the Crater-top_
Not Wilks, but Coniston! His drawling, British voice:
"You, Gregg Haljan! How nice!"
His voice broke off as he jerked his arm from me. My hand with the
bullet-protector came up, but with a sweeping blow he struck my
wrist. The weapon dropped to the rocks.
I fought instinctively, those first moments; my mind was whirling with
the shock of surprise. This was not Wilks, but the brigand Coniston.
His blow wrenched him around. Awkward, fighting in the air-puffed
suits, with only a body-weight of some thirty pounds! Coniston
stumbled over the rocks. I had still scarce recovered my wits, but I
avoided his outflung arms, and, stooping, tried to recover my
revolver. It lay nearby. But Coniston followed my scrambling steps and
fell upon me. My foot struck the weapon; it slid away and fell down a
crag into a six-foot pit.
We locked together, and when I rose erect he had me around the middle.
His voice jangled with broken syllables in my receiver.
"Do for you now, Haljan--"
It was an eery combat. We swayed, shoving, kicking, wrestling. His
hold around my middle shut off the Erentz circulation; the warning
buzz rang in my ears to mingle with the rasp of his curses. I flung
him off, and my tiny Erentz motors recovered. He staggered away, but
in a great leap came at me again.
I was taller, heavier and far stronger than Coniston. But I found him
crafty, and where I was awkward in handling my lightness, he seemed
more skilfully agile.
  *  *  *  *  *
I became aware that we were on the twenty-foot square grid of the
observatory platform. It had a low metal railing. We surged against
it. I caught a dizzying glimpse of the abyss. Then it receded as we
bounced the other way. And then we fell to the grid. His helmet bashed
against mine, striking as though butting with the side of his head to
puncture my visor-panel. His gloved fingers were trying to rip at the
fabric around my throat.
As we regained our feet, I flung him off, and bounded, like a diver,
head-first into him. He went backward, but skilfully kept his feet,
gripped me again and shoved me.
I was tottering at the head of the staircase--falling. But I clutched
at him.
We fell some twenty or thirty feet to the next lower spider landing.
The impact must have dazed us both. I recall my vague idea that we had
fallen down the cliff--my Erentz motors smashed--my air shut off. Then
the air came again. The roaring in my ears was stilled; my head
cleared, and I found that we were on the landing--fighting.
He presently broke away from me, bounded to the summit, with me after
him. In the close confines of the suit I was bathed in sweat, and
gasping. I had had no thought to increase the oxygen content of my
air. But I sorely needed more oxygen for my laboring, pounding heart
and my panting breath. I fumbled for the oxygen control-lever. I could
not find it; or it would not operate.
I realized I was fighting sluggishly, almost aimlessly. But so was
Coniston!
  *  *  *  *  *
It seemed dreamlike. A phantasmagoria of blows and staggering steps. A
nightmare with only the horrible vision of this goggled helmet always
before my eyes.
It seemed that we were rolling on the ground, back on the summit. The
unshadowed Earthlight was clear and bright. The abyss was beside me.
Coniston, rolling, was now on top, now under me, trying to shove me
over the brink. It was all like a dream--as though I were asleep,
dreaming that I did not have enough air.
I strove to keep my senses. He was struggling to roll me over the
brink. Ah, that would not do! But I was so tired. One cannot fight
without oxygen!
I suddenly knew that I had shaken him off and gained my feet. He rose
up, swaying. He was as tired, confused, half-asphyxiated as I.
The brink of the abyss was behind us. I lunged, desperately shoving,
avoiding his clutch.
He went over, and fell soundlessly, his body whirling end over end
down into the shadows, far down.
I drew back. My senses faded as I sank panting to the rocks. But with
inactivity, my thumping heart quieted. My respirations slowed. The
Erentz circulation gained on my poisoned air. It purified.
That blessed oxygen! My head cleared again. Strength came to me. I
felt better.
Coniston had fallen to his death. I was victor. I went to the brink,
cautiously, for I was still dizzy. I could see, far down there on the
crater-floor, a little patch of Earthlight in which a mashed human
figure was lying.
  *  *  *  *  *
I staggered back again. A moment or two must have passed while I stood
there on the summit, with my senses clearing and my strength renewed
as the blood-stream cleared in my veins.
I was victor. Coniston was dead. I saw now, down on the lower
staircase below the camp-ledge, another goggled figure lying huddled.
That was Wilks, no doubt. Coniston had doubtless caught him there,
surprised him, killed him.
My attention, as I stood gazing, went down to the camp-buildings.
Another figure was outside! It bounded along the ledge, reached the
foot of the ascending staircase at the top of which I was standing.
With agile leaps, it came mounting at me!
Another brigand! Miko? No, it was not large enough to be Miko, not
nearly large enough. I was still confused. I thought of Hahn. But that
was absurd. Hahn was in the wreck of the _Planetara_. One of the
stewards then....
The figure came up the staircase recklessly, to assail me. I took a
step backward, bracing myself to receive this new antagonist.
And then I saw Miko! Unquestionably he: for there was no mistaking
his giant figure. He was down on the camp-ledge, running toward the
foot of the staircase, coming up to help this other man in advance of
him.
I thought of my revolver. I turned to try and find it. I was aware
that the first of my assailants was at the stairhead. I could not
locate at once where the revolver had fallen. I would be caught,
leaped upon from behind. Should I run?
I swung back to see what the oncoming brigand was doing. He had
reached the summit. His arms went up, legs bent under him. With a
sailing leap he launched for me. I could have bounded way, but with a
last look to locate the revolver, I braced myself for the shock.
The figure hit me. It was small and light in my clutching arms. I
recall I saw that Miko was half-way up the staircase. I gripped my
assailant. The audiphone contact brought a voice.
"Gregg! Is it you?"
It was Anita clutching at me!
CHAPTER XXVI
_At Bay_
"Gregg, you're safe!"
She had heard the camp corridors resounding with the shouts that Wilks
and Haljan were fighting. She had come upon a suit and helmet by the
manual emergency lock, had run out through the lock, confused, with
her only idea to stop Wilks and me from fighting. Then she had seen
one of us killed. Impulsive, barely knowing what she was doing, she
mounted the stairs, frantic to find if I were alive.
"Anita!"
Miko was coming! She had not seen him: for she had no thought of
brigands--only the belief that either Wilks or I had been killed.
But now, as for an instant we stood together on the rocks near the
observation platform, I could see the towering figure of Miko nearing
the top of the stairs.
"Anita, that's Miko! We must run."
Then I saw my bullet projector. It lay in a bowl-like depression quite
near us. I jumped for it. And as I tore loose from Anita, she leaped
down after me. It was a broken bowl in the rocks, some six feet deep.
It was open on the side facing the staircase--a narrow, ravinelike
gully, full of gray, broken, tumbled rock-masses. The little gully was
littered with crags and boulders. But I could see out through it.
Miko had come to the head of the staircase. He stopped there, his
great figure etched sharply by the Earthlight. I think he must have
known that Coniston was the one who had fallen over the cliff, as my
helmet and Coniston's were different enough for him to recognize which
was which. He did not know who I was, but he did know me for an enemy.
  *  *  *  *  *
He stood now at the summit, peering to see where we had gone. He was
no more than fifty feet from us.
"Anita, lie down."
I pulled her down on the rocks. I took aim with the bullet projector.
But I had forgotten our helmet-lights. Miko must have seen them just
as I pulled the trigger. The flying bullet missed him as he jumped
sidewise. He dropped, but I could see him moving in the shadows to
where a jutting rock gave him shelter. I fired again.
"Gregg."
I had stood up to take aim. I saw the bullet chip a bit of rock. Anita
pulled me sharply down beside her.
"Gregg, he's armed!"
It was his turn to fire. It came--the familiar vague flash of the
paralyzing ray. It spat its tint of color on the rocks near us, but
could not reach us.
Miko rose a moment later and bounded to another rock. I scrambled up,
and shot at him, but missed. Then he crouched and returned my fire
from his new angle; but Anita and I had shifted.
Time passed--only a few moments. I could not see Miko momentarily.
Perhaps he was crouching; perhaps he had moved away again. He was, or
had been, on slightly higher ground than the bottom of our bowl. It
was dim down here where we were lying, but I feared that every moment
Miko might appear and strike at us. His ray at any short range would
penetrate our visor-panes, even though our suits might temporarily
resist it.
"Anita--it's too dangerous here."
Had I been alone, I might perhaps have leaped up to lure Miko. But
with Anita I did not dare chance it.
"We've got to get back to the camp," I told her. The audiphone brought
her comment:
"Perhaps he has gone."
  *  *  *  *  *
But he had not. We saw him again, out in a distant patch of
Earthlight. He was further from us than before, but on still higher
ground. We had extinguished our small helmet-lights. But he knew we
were here, and possibly he could see us. His projector flashed again.
But we had again shifted, and were untouched. He was a hundred feet or
more away now. His weapon was of longer range than mine. I did not
answer his fire, for I could not hope to hit him at such a distance,
and the flash of my weapon would help him with his aim.
I murmured to Anita, "We must get out of here."
Yet how did I dare take Anita from these concealing shadows? Miko
could reach us so easily as we bounded away, in plain view in the
Earthlight of the open summit! We were caught, at bay in this little
bowl.
The camp from here was not visible. But out through the broken gully,
beyond the staircase top, a white beam of light suddenly came up from
below.
"_Haljan._"
It spelled the signal.
"_Haljan._"
It was coming from the Grantline instrument room, I knew.
I could answer it with my helmet-light, but I did not dare. I
hesitated.
"Try it," urged Anita.
  *  *  *  *  *
We crouched where we thought we might be safe from Miko's fire. My
little light-beam shot up from the bowl. It was undoubtedly visible to
the camp.
"_Yes? I am Haljan._"
And I added:
"_Help! Send us help._"
I did not mention Anita. Miko could doubtless read these signals. And
in the camp they must have missed Anita by now. They answered:
"_Cannot_--"
I lost the rest of it. There came a flash from Miko's weapon. But it
gave us confidence. He could not reach us at the moment.
The Grantline beam repeated:
"_Cannot come out. Portes broken. You cannot get in. Stay where you
are--an hour or two. We may be able to repair portes._"
The portes were broken! Stay here an hour or two! But I could not hold
this position against Miko that long! Sooner or later he would find a
place from where he could sweep this bowl beyond possibility of our
hiding. I saw him running now, well beyond my range, to ferret out
another point of vantage.
I extinguished my light. What use was it to tell Grantline anything
further? Besides, my light was dangerous.
But the Grantline beam spelled another message:
"_The brigand ship is coming! It will be here before we can get out to
you! No lights! We will try and hide our location._"
And the signal-beam brought a last appeal to me:
"_Miko and his men will divulge where we are. Unless you can stop
them_--"
The beam vanished. The lights of the Grantline camp made a faint glow
that showed above the crater-edge. The glow died, as the camp now was
plunged into darkness.
CHAPTER XXVII
_Anita's Plan_
We crouched in the shadows, the Earthlight filtering down to us. The
skulking figure of Miko had vanished; but he was out there somewhere
on the crags I was sure, lurking, maneuvering to where he could strike
us with his ray. Anita's metal-gloved hand was on my arm; in my ear
diaphragm her voice sounded eager and unmistakable:
"What was the signal, Gregg?"
She could not read the semaphore lights. I told her.
"Oh Gregg, the Martian ship coming!"
Her mind clung to that as the most important thing. But not so myself.
To me there was only the realization that Anita was caught out here,
almost at the mercy of Miko's ray. Grantline's men could not get out
to help us, nor could I get Anita into the camp.
She added, "Where do you suppose the ship is? In telescopic view?"
"Yes--twenty or thirty thousand miles up, probably."
The stars and the Earth were visible over us. Somewhere up there
disclosed by Grantline's instrument but not yet discernible to the
naked eye, Miko's reinforcements were hovering.
I stood up cautiously to try and locate Miko. Immediately I saw him.
He jumped as though fearing my coming bullet, and I dropped back,
barely avoiding his flash, which swept across the top of our bowl.
"Gregg--Gregg, don't take such a chance!"
We lay for a moment in silence. It was horribly nerve-straining. Miko
could be creeping up on us. Would he dare chance my sudden fire?
Creeping--or would he make a swift, unexpected rush?
The feeling that he was upon us abruptly swept me. I jumped to my
feet, against Anita's effort to hold me. But again Miko had vanished.
Where was he now?
  *  *  *  *  *
I sank back. "That ship will be here in a few hours."
I told her what Grantline's signal had suggested: the ship was
hovering overhead. It must be fairly close; for Grantline's telescope
had revealed its identity as a bandit flyer, unmarked by any of the
standard code-identification lights. It was doubtless too far away as
yet to have located the whereabouts of Grantline's camp. The Martian
brigands knew that we were in the vicinity of Archimedes, but no more
than that. Searching this glowing Moon surface, our little lights, the
tiny local semaphore beams we had momentarily been using, could easily
pass unnoticed.
But as the brigand ship approached now--dropping close to Archimedes
as it probably would--our danger was that Miko and his men would then
signal it, join it, and reveal the camp's location, and the brigand
attack would be upon us.
I told this now to Anita. "The signal said, '_Unless you can stop
them_.'"
It was an appeal to me. But how could I respond to it? What could I
do, alone out here with Anita, to cope with this enemy?
Anita made no comment.
I added, "That ship will land near Archimedes I imagine, within an
hour or two! If Grantline can repair his portes, and I can get you
inside--"
Again she made no comment. Then suddenly she gripped me. "Gregg, look
there!"
Out through the gully break in our bowl the figure of Miko showed! He
was running. But not at us. Circling the summit, leaping to keep
himself behind the upstanding crags. He passed the head of the
staircase; he did not descend it, but headed off along the summit of
the curving crater-rim.
  *  *  *  *  *
I stood up to watch him. He was making off. Abandoning us!
"He's going!"
I let her stand up beside me; cautiously, at first, for it occurred to
me that this might be a ruse to cover some other of Miko's men who
might be lurking up here.
But the summit seemed clear. The figure of Miko was a thousand feet
away now. We could see the tiny blob of it bobbing over the rocks.
Then it plunged down--not into the crater-valley, but out toward the
open Moon surface.
Miko had abandoned his attack on us. The reason seemed plain. He had
come here from his encampment with Coniston, had sent Coniston ahead
to lure and kill Wilks. When this was done, Coniston had flashed his
brief signal to Miko, who was hiding nearby.
It was not like the brigand leader to remain in the background. Miko
was no coward. But Coniston could impersonate Wilks, whereas Miko's
giant stature at once would reveal his identity. Miko had been engaged
in smashing the portes. He had looked up and seen me kill Coniston. He
had come up to assail me. And then he had read Grantline's signal to
me. It was his first knowledge that his ship was at hand. With the
camp exits inoperative, Grantline and his men were imprisoned. Miko
made an effort to kill me. He did not know my companion was Anita. The
effort was taking too long: with the Grantline camp imprisoned and his
ship at hand, it was Miko's best move to return to his own camp,
rejoin his men, and await their opportunity to signal the ship.
At least, so I reasoned it. Anita and I stood alone. What could we do?
  *  *  *  *  *
We went to the brink of the cliff. The unlighted Grantline buildings
showed vaguely in the Earthlight.
I said, "We'll go down, I'll leave you there. You can wait at the
porte. They'll repair it soon, perhaps, and let you in."
"And what will you do?" she demanded.
I was hurrying her down the stairs. But suddenly she stopped. "What
are you going to do, Gregg?"
I had not intended to tell her. "Hurry, Anita!"
"Why?" She stood stock still. Through the visors I could see her white
face gazing at me rebelliously.
"Why should I hurry, Gregg?"
"Because I want to leave you at the porte. I'm going after Miko--try
and locate where he and his men are camping."
I had indeed no specific plan as yet. But it seemed useless for me to
sit at the porte waiting to be let in.
"But he's gone, Gregg."
She was right on that. Miko was already a mile or more away, down on
the outer surface, making off. He would soon be out of sight. It would
be impossible to follow him.
"Gregg, let me go with you."
She jerked away from me and bounded back up the staircase. I caught
her on the summit.
"Anita!"
"I'm going with you."
"You're going to stay here."
"I'm not!"
This exasperating controversy! And time was so precious!
"Anita, please."
"I'll be safer with you than waiting here, Gregg."
  *  *  *  *  *
It almost decided me. Perhaps she would. It was only my intention to
follow Miko at a distance. And with much more of this delay here, he
would be lost to me.
And she added, "Besides, I won't stay, and you can't make me."
We ran along the crater-top. At its distant edge the lower plain
spread before us. Far down, and far away on the distant broken
surface, the leaping figure of Miko showed.
We plunged down the broken outer slope, reached the level. Soon, as we
ran, the little Grantline crater faded behind us.
Anita ran more skillfully than I. Ten minutes or so passed. We had seen
Miko, and the direction he was taking, but down here on the plain we
could no longer see him. It struck me that this was purposeless--and
dangerous. Suppose Miko were to see us following? Suppose he stopped and
lay in ambush to fire at us as we came leaping heedlessly by?
"Anita, wait," I said, checking her.
I drew her down amid a group of tumbled boulders. And then abruptly
she clung to me.
"Gregg, I know what we can do! Gregg, don't tell me you won't let me
try it!"
  *  *  *  *  *
I listened to her plan. Incredible! Incredibly dangerous! Yet, as I
pondered it, the very daring of the thing seemed the measure of its
possible success. The brigands would never imagine we could be so
rash!
"But Anita--"
"Gregg, you're stupid!" It was her turn to be exasperated. In truth, I
was indeed in no mood for daring, for my mind was obsessed with
Anita's safety. I had been planning that we might see the glow of
Miko's encampment, and then return to Grantline and hope that he would
have the portes repaired.
"But Gregg--the safety of the treasure--of all the Grantline men...."
"To the infernal with that! It's you--your safety."
"My safety, then! If you put me in the camp and the brigands attack it
and I am killed--what then? But this plan of mine, if we can do it,
Gregg ... safety, in the end, for all of us."
And it seemed possible. We crouched, discussing it. So daring a thing!
The brigand ship would come down near Archimedes. That was fifty miles
from Grantline. The brigands from Mars would not have seen the dark
Grantline buildings hidden in the little crater-pit. They would wait
for Miko and his men to make their whereabouts known.
  *  *  *  *  *
Miko's encampment was ahead of us now, undoubtedly. We had been
following him toward the Mare Imbrium; we were at its borders now.
Archimedes from here was also about fifty miles.
And Anita proposed that we go to Archimedes, climb in slope and await
the coming of the brigand ship. Miko would be off in the Mare Imbrium.
Or at least, we hoped so. He would signal his ship. But Anita and I,
closer to it, would also signal it--and, posing as brigands, could
join it!
"Remember, Gregg, I am Anita Prince, George's sister." Her voice
trembled as, she mentioned her dead brother. "They know that George
was in Miko's pay, and I am his sister.... It will help convince
them."
This daring scheme! If we could join the ship, we might be able to
persuade its leader that Miko's distant signals were merely a ruse of
Grantline to lure the brigands in that direction. A long-range
projector from the ship would kill Miko and his men as they came
forward to join it! And then we could falsely direct the brigands,
lead them away from Grantline and the treasure.
"Gregg, we must try it."
Heaven help me, I yielded to her persuasion!
We turned at right angles and ran toward where the distant frowning
walls of Archimedes loomed against the starlit sky.
CHAPTER XXVIII
_The Ascent of Archimedes_
The broken shaggy ramparts of the giant crater rose above us. We
toiled upward, out of the foothills, clinging now to the crags and
pitted terraces of the main ascent. An hour had passed since we turned
from the borders of the Mare Imbrium. Or was it two hours? I could not
tell. I only know that we ran with desperate frantic haste.
Anita would not admit that she was tired. She was more skilful than I
in this leaping over the broken rock masses. Yet I felt that her
slight strength must give out. It seemed miles up the undulating
slopes of the foothills with the black and white ramparts of the
massive crater close before us.
And then the main ascent. There were places where, like smooth black
frozen ice, the walls rose sheer. We avoided them, toiling aside,
plunging into gullies, crossing pits where sometimes we perforce went
downwards, and then up again; or sometimes we stood, hot and
breathless, upon ledges, recovering our strength, selecting the best
route upward.
This tumbled mass of rock! Honeycombed everywhere with caves and
passages leading into darkness impenetrable. There were pits into
which we might so easily have fallen; ravines to span, sometimes with
a leap, sometimes by a long and arduous detour.
Endless climb! We came to a ledge, with the plains of the Mare Imbrium
stretching out beneath us. We might have been upon this main ascent
for an hour; the plains were far down, the broken surface down there
smoothed now by the perspective of our height. And yet still above us
the brooding circular wall went up into the sky. Ten thousand feet
still above us--I think it was at least that, or more.
"You're tired, Anita. We'd better stay here."
"No! If we could only get to the top--the ship may land on the other
side--they would see us if we were at the top."
  *  *  *  *  *
There was as yet no sign of the brigand ship. With every stop for rest
we searched the starry vault. The Earth hung over us, flattened beyond
the full. The stars blazed to mingle with the Earthlight and illumine
these massive crags of the Archimedes walls. But no speck appeared to
tell us that the ship was up there.
We were on the curving side of the Archimedes wall which fronted the
Mare Imbrium to the North. The plains lay like a great frozen sea,
congealed ripples shining in the light of the Earth, with dark
patches to mark the hollows. Somewhere down there--six or eight
thousand feet below us now, or even more than that, for all I could
tell--Miko's encampment lay concealed. We searched for lights of it,
but could see none.
Or had Miko rejoined his party, left his camp and come here like
ourselves to climb Archimedes? Or was our assumption wholly
wrong--perhaps the brigand ship would not land near here at all?
Sweeping around from the Mare Imbrium, the plains were less
smooth--the shattered, crag-littered, crater-scarred region beyond
which the distant Apennines raised their terraced walls. The little
crater which concealed the Grantline camp was off that way. There was
nothing to mark it from here.
"Gregg, do you see anything up there? There seems to be a blur."
  *  *  *  *  *
Her sight, sharper than mine, had picked it out. The descending
brigand ship! A faintest tiny blur against the stars, a few of them
occulted as though strangely an invisible shadow were upon them. A
growing shadow, materializing into a blur--a blob, a shape faintly
defined. Then sharper until we were sure of what we saw. It was the
brigand ship. It came dropping slowly, silently down.
We crouched on the little ledge. A cave-mouth was behind us. A gully
was beside us, a break in the ledge; and at our feet the wall dropped
sheer.
We had extinguished our little lights. We crouched, silently gazing up
into the stars.
The ship, when first we distinguished it was central over Archimedes.
We thought for a while that it might descend into the crater. But it
did not; it came sailing forward.
I whispered into the audiphone--whispering by instinct, as though out
here in all this airless desolation someone might overhear us!
"It's coming over the crater."
Her hand pressed my arm in answer.
I recalled that when, from the _Planetara_, Miko had forced Snap to
signal this brigand band on Mars, Miko's only information as to the
whereabouts of the Grantline camp was that it lay between Archimedes
and the Apennines. That was Grantline's first message to us, and Miko
had relayed it to his men. The brigands from Mars now were following
that information.
A tense interval passed. We could see the ship plainly above us now, a
gray-black shape among the stars up beyond the shaggy, towering
crater-rim. The vessel came upon a level keel, hull-down, slowly
circling, looking for Miko's signal, no doubt, or for possible lights
of Grantline. They were also picking a landing place.
  *  *  *  *  *
We saw it soon as a cylindrical, cigarlike shape, rather smaller than
the _Planetara_, but similar of design. It bore lights now. The ports
of its hull were tiny rows of illumination, and the glow of light
under its rounding upper dome was faintly visible.
A bandit ship, no doubt of that. Its identification keel-plate was
empty of official pass-code lights. These brigands had not attempted
to secure official sailing lights when leaving Ferrok-Shahn. It was an
outlawed ship, unmistakably. And here upon the deserted Moon there was
no need for secrecy. Its lights were openly displayed, that Miko might
see it and join it.
It went slowly past us, only a few thousand feet higher than our
level. We could see the whole outline of its pointed cylinder-hull,
with the rounded dome on top. And under the dome was its open
deck-space, with a little cabin superstructure in the center.
I thought for a moment that by some fortunate chance it might land
quite near us. There was a wide ledge a quarter of a mile away.
"Anita, look."
But it went past. And then I saw that it was heading for a level,
plateau-like surface a few miles further on. It dropped, cautiously
floating down.
There was still no sign of Miko. But I realized that haste was
necessary. We must be the first to join the brigand ship.
I lifted Anita to her feet. "I don't think we should signal from
here."
"No. Miko might see it."
We could not tell where he was. Down on the plains, perhaps? Or up
here, somewhere in these miles of towering rocks?
"Are you ready, Anita?"
"Yes, Gregg."
  *  *  *  *  *
I stared through the visors at her white, solemn face.
"Yes, I'm ready," she repeated.
Her hand-pressure seemed to me suddenly like a farewell. Were we
plunging rashly into what was destined to mean our death? Was this a
farewell?
An instinct swept me not to do this thing. Why, in an hour or two I
could have Anita back to the comparative safety of the Grantline
buildings. The exit portes would doubtless be repaired by now. I could
get her inside.
She had bounded away from me, leaped down some thirty feet into the
broken gully, to cross it and then up on the other side. I stood for
an instant watching her fantastic shape, with the great rounded,
goggled, trunked helmet and the lump on her shoulders which held the
little Erentz motors. Then I made after her.
It did not take us long--two or three miles of circling along the
giant wall. The ship lay only a few hundred feet above our level.
We stood at last on a buttelike pinnacle. The hull-porte lights of the
ship were close over us. And there were moving lights up there, tiny
moving spots on the adjacent rocks. The brigands had come out,
prowling around to investigate their location.
No signal yet from Miko. But it might come at any moment.
"I'll flash now," I whispered.
"Yes."
The brigands had probably not yet seen us. I took the lamp from my
helmet. My hand was trembling. Suppose my signal were answered by a
shot? A flash from some giant projector mounted on the ship?
Anita crouched behind a rock, as she had promised. I stood with my
torch, and flung its switch.
My puny light-beam shot up. I waved it, touched the ship with its
faint glowing circle of illumination.
They saw me. There was a sudden movement among the lights up there.
  *  *  *  *  *
I semaphored:
"_I am from Miko. Do not fire._"
I used the open Universal Code. In Martian first, and then in English.
There was no answer, but no attack. I tried again.
"_This is Haljan, once of the_ Planetara. _George Prince's sister is
with me. There has been disaster to Miko._"
A small light-beam came down from the brink of the overhead cliff
beside the ship.
"_We read you._"
I went steadily on: "_Disaster--the_ Planetara _is wrecked. All killed
but me and George Prince's sister. We want to join you._"
I flashed off my light. The answer came: "_Where is the Grantline
camp?_"
"_Near here. The Mare Imbrium._"
As though to answer my lie, from down on the Earthlit plains, ten
miles or so from the crater-base, a tiny signal-light shot up. Anita
saw it and gripped me.
"There is Miko's light!"
It spelled in Martian, "_Come down. Land Mare Imbrium._"
Miko had seen the signalling up here and was joining it! He repeated,
"_Land Mare Imbrium._"
  *  *  *  *  *
I flashed a protest up to the ship: "_Beware! That is Grantline!
Trickery!_"
From the ship the summons came: "_Come up._"
We had won this first encounter! Miko must have realized his
disadvantage. His distant light went out.
"Come, Anita."
There was no retreat now. But again I seemed to feel in the pressure
of her hand that vague farewell.
Her voice whispered, "We must do our best, act our best to be
convincing."
In the white glow of a search-beam we climbed the crags, reached the
broad upper ledge. Helmeted figures rushed at us, searched us for
weapons, seized our helmet lights. The evil face of a giant Martian
peered at me through the visors. Two other monstrous, towering figures
seized Anita.
We were shoved toward the port-locks at the base of the ship's hull.
Above the hull bulge I could see the grids of projectors mounted in
the dome-side, and the figures of men standing on the deck, peering
down at us.
We went through the admission locks into a hull corridor, up an
incline passage, and reached the lighted deck. Our helmets were taken
off. The Martian brigands crowded around us.
CHAPTER XXIX
_On the Brigand Ship_
Anita's words echoed in my memory: "We must act our best to be
convincing." It was not her ability that I doubted as much as my own.
She had played the part of George Prince cleverly, unmasked only by an
evil chance.
I steeled myself to face the searching glances of the brigands as they
shoved around us. This was a desperate game into which we had plunged!
For all our acting, how easy it would be for some small chance thing
abruptly to undo us! I realized it, and now, as I gazed into the
peering faces of these men from Mars, I cursed my witless rashness
which had brought Anita into this!
The brigands--some ten or fifteen of them here on the deck--stood in a
ring around us. They were all big men, nearly of a seven-foot
average, dressed in leather jerkins and short leather breeches, with
bare knees and flaring leatherboots. Piratical swaggering fellows,
knife-blades mingled with small hand-projectors fastened to their
belts. Gray, heavy faces, some with scraggling, unshaved beard. They
plucked at us, jabbering in Martian.
One of them seemed the leader. I said sharply, "Are you the commander
here? I speak not Ilton[4] well. You speak the Earth English?"
[Footnote 4: Ilton, the ruling race and official language of the
Martian Union.]
"Yes," he said readily, "I am Commander here." He spoke English with
the same freedom and accent of Miko. "Is this George Prince's sister?"
"Yes. Her name is Anita Prince. Tell your men to take their hands off
her."
He waved his men away. They all seemed more interested in Anita than
in me. He added:
"I am Set Potan." He addressed Anita. "George Prince's sister? You are
called Anita? I have heard of you. I knew your brother--indeed, you
look very much like him."
He swept his plumed hat to the grid with a swaggering gesture of
homage. A courtierlike fellow this, debonair as a Venus cavalier!
He accepted us. I realized that Anita's presence was immensely
valuable in making us convincing. Yet there was about this Potan--as
with Miko--a disturbing suggestion of irony. I could not make him out.
I decided that we had fooled him. Then I remarked the steely glitter
of his eyes as he turned to me.
"You were an officer of the _Planetara_?"
  *  *  *  *  *
The insignia of my rank was visible on my white jacket-collar which
showed beneath the Erentz suit, now that my helmet was off.
"Yes, I was supposed to be. But a year ago I embarked upon this
adventure with Miko."
He was leading us to his cabin. "The _Planetara_ wrecked? Miko dead?"
"And Hahn and Coniston. George Prince, too--we are the only
survivors."
While we divested ourselves of our Erentz suits at his command, I told
him briefly of the _Planetara's_ fall. All had been killed on board
save Anita and me. We had escaped, awaited his coming. The treasure
was here; we had located the Grantline camp, and were ready to lead
him to it.
Did he believe me? He listened quietly. He seemed not shocked at the
death of his comrades. Nor yet pleased: merely imperturbable.
I added with a sly, sidelong glance, "There were too many of us on the
_Planetara_. The purser had joined us, and many of the crew. And there
was Miko's sister, the Setta Moa--too many. The treasure divides
better among less."
An amused smile played on his thin gray lips. But he nodded. The fear
which had leaped in me was allayed by his next words.
"True enough, Haljan. He was a domineering fellow, Miko. A third of it
all was for him alone. But now...."
The third would go to this sub-leader, Potan! The implication was
obvious.
I said, "Before we go any further--I can trust you for my share?"
"Of course."
  *  *  *  *  *
I figured that my very boldness in bargaining so prematurely would
convince him. I insisted, "And Miss Prince? She will have her
brother's share?"
Clever Anita! She put in swiftly, "I give no information until you
promise! We know the location of the Grantline camp, its weapons, its
defense, the amount and location of the ore. I warn you, if you do not
play us fair...."
He laughed heartily. He seemed to like us. He spread his huge legs as
he lounged in his settle, and drank of the bowl which one of his men
set before him.
"Little tigress! Fear me not--I play fair!" He pushed two of the bowls
across the table. "Drink, Haljan. All is well with us, and I am glad
to hear it. Miss Prince, drink my health as your leader."
I waved it away from Anita. "We need all our wits; your strong Martian
drinks are dangerous. Look here, I'll tell you just how the situation
stands--"
I plunged into a glib account of our supposed wanderings to find the
Grantline camp; its location off in the Mare Imbrium--hidden in a
cavern there. Potan, with the drink, and under the gaze of Anita's
eyes, was in a high good humor. He laughed when I told him that we had
dared to invade the Grantline camp, had smashed its exit portes, had
even gotten up to have a look at where the ore was piled.
"Well done, Haljan! You're a fellow to my liking!" But his gaze was on
Anita. "You dress like a man, or a charming boy."
She still wore the dark clothes of her brother. She said, "I am used
to action--man's garb pleases me. You shall treat me like a man, give
me my share of the gold-leaf."
  *  *  *  *  *
He had already demanded of us the meaning of that signal from the Mare
Imbrium. Miko's signal! It had not come again, though any moment I
feared it. I told him that Grantline had doubtless repaired his
damaged portes and sallied out to assail me in reprisal. And seeing
the brigand ship landing on Archimedes, had tried to lure it.
I wondered if my explanation were very convincing. It did not sound
so. But he was flushed now with the drink. And Anita added:
"Grantline knows the territory near his camp very well. He is equipped
only for short-range fighting."
I took it up. "It's like this, Potan: if he could get you to land
unsuspectingly near the mouth of his cavern...."
I pictured how Grantline might have figured on a sudden surprise
attack upon the ship. It was his only chance to catch it unprepared.
We were all three in friendly, intimate mood now. Potan said, "We'll
land down there right enough! But I need a few hours for my
assembling."
"He will not dare advance," I said. "For one thing, he can't leave the
treasure."
"He knows we have unmasked his lure," Anita put in smilingly. "Haljan
and I joining you--that silenced him. His light went out very
promptly, didn't it?"
She flashed me a side-gaze. Were we acting convincingly? But if Miko
started up his signals again, they might so quickly betray us! Anita's
thoughts were upon that, for she added:
"Grantline will not dare show his light! If he does, Set Potan, we can
blast him with a ray from here! Can't we?"
"Yes," Potan agreed. "If he comes within ten miles, I have one
powerful enough. We are assembling it now."
"And we have thirty men?" Anita persisted. "When we sail down to
attack him it should not be very difficult to kill all the Grantline
party. Thirty of us--that's enough to share in this treasure. I'm glad
Miko is dead."
"By Heaven, Haljan, this girl of yours is small, but very
blood-thirsty!"
"That accursed Miko murdered her brother," I explained.
  *  *  *  *  *
Acting! And never once did we dare relax! If only Miko's signals would
hold off and give us time!
We may have talked for half an hour. We were in a small, steel-lined
cubby, located in the forward deck-space of the ship. The dome was
over it. I could see from where I sat at the table that there was a
forward observatory tower under the dome quite near here. The ship was
laid out in rather similar fashion to the _Planetara_, though
considerably smaller.
Potan had dismissed his men from his cubby so as to be alone with us.
Out on the deck I could see them dragging apparatus about--bringing
the mechanisms of giant projectors up from below, beginning to
assemble them. Occasionally some of the men would come to our cubby
windows to peer in at us curiously.
My mind was roaming as I talked. For all my manner of casualness, I
knew that haste was necessary. Whatever Anita and I were to do must be
quickly done. But to win this fellow's utter confidence first was
necessary, so that we might have the freedom of the ship, might move
about unnoticed, unwatched.
I was horribly tense inside. Through the dome windows across the deck
from the cubby the rocks of the Lunar landscape were visible. I could
see the brink of this ledge upon which the ship lay, the descending
crags down the precipitous wall of Archimedes to the Earthlit plains
far below. Miko, Moa, and a few of the _Planetara's_ crew were down
there somewhere.
  *  *  *  *  *
Anita and I had a fairly definite plan. We were now in Potan's
confidence. With this interview at an end, I felt that our status
among the brigands would be established. We would be free to move
about the ship, join in its activities. It ought to be possible to
locate the signal-room, get friendly with the operator there.
Perhaps we would find a secret opportunity to flash a signal to Earth.
This ship, I was confident, would have the power for a long-range
signal, if not of too sustained a length. It was a desperate thing to
attempt but our whole procedure was desperate! And I felt--if Anita
perhaps could cajole the guard or the duty-man from the signal-room--I
might send a single flash or two that would reach the Earth. Just a
distress call, signed "Grantline." If I could do that and not get
caught.
Anita was engaging Potan in talking of his plans. The brigand leader
was boasting of his well-equipped ship, the daring of his men, and
questioning her about the size of the treasure. My thoughts were free
to roam.
A signal to Earth. And while we were making friends with these
brigands, the longest range electronic projector was being assembled.
Miko then could flash his signal and be damned to him! I would be on
the deck with that projector. Its operator, and I would turn it upon
Miko--one flash of it and he and his little band would be wiped out.
But there was our escape to be thought of. We could not remain very
long with these brigands. We could tell them that the Grantline camp
was on the Mare Imbrium. It would delay them for a time, but our lie
would soon be discovered. We must escape from them, get away and back
to Grantline. With Miko dead--a distress signal to Earth--and Potan in
ignorance of Grantline's location, the treasure would be safe until
help arrived from Earth.
It all fitted together so nicely! It seemed possible of success.
Our futile plans! Star-crossed always, doomed, fated always to be
upset by such unforeseen evil chances!
"By the infernal, little Anita, you look like a dove, but you're a
tigress! A comrade after my own heart--blood-thirsty as a
fire-worshipper!"
  *  *  *  *  *
Her laugh rang out to mingle with his. "Oh no, Set Potan! I am
treasure-thirsty."
"We'll get the treasure, never fear, little Anita."
"With you to lead us, Potan, I'm sure we will."
A man entered the cubby. Potan looked frowningly around. "What is it,
Argle?"
The fellow answered in Martian, leered at Anita and withdrew.
Potan stood up. I noticed that he was unsteady with the drink.
"They want me with the work at the projectors."
"Go ahead," I said.
He nodded. We were comrades now.
"Amuse yourself, Haljan. Or come out on deck if you wish. I will tell
my men you are one of us."
"And tell them to keep their hands off Miss Prince."
He stared at me. "I had not thought of that--a woman among so many
men."
His own gaze at Anita was as leeringly offensive as any of his men
could have given. He said, "Have no fear, little tigress."
Anita laughed. "I am afraid of nothing."
But when he had lurched from the cabin she touched me. Smiled with her
mannish swagger, for fear we were still observed, and murmured:
"Oh, Gregg, I am afraid!"
We stayed in the cubby a few moments, whispering--trying to plan.
"You think the signal room is in the tower, Gregg? This tower outside
our window here?"
"Yes, I think so."
"Shall we go out and see?"
"Yes. Keep near me always."
"Oh, Gregg. I will!"
We deposited our Erentz suits carefully in a corner of the cubby. We
might need them so suddenly! Then we swaggered out to join the
brigands working on the deck.
CHAPTER XXX
_Desperate Plans_
The deck glowed lurid in the queer blue-greenish glare of Martian
electro-fuse lights. It was in a bustle of ordered activity. Some
twenty of the crew were scattered about, working in little groups.
Apparatus was being brought up from below to be assembled. There was a
pile of Erentz suits and helmets, of Martian pattern, but still very
similar to those with which Grantline's expedition was equipped. There
were giant projectors of several kinds, some familiar to me, others
of a fashion I had never seen before. It seemed there were six or
eight of them, still dismantled, with a litter of their attendant
batteries and coils and tube-amplifiers. They were to be mounted here
on the deck, I surmised; I saw in the dome-side one or two of them
already rolled into position at the necessary pressure portes.
Anita and I stood outside Potan's cubby, gazing around us curiously.
The men looked at us, but none of them spoke.
"Let's watch from here a moment," I whispered. She nodded, standing
with her hand on my arm. I felt that we were very small, here in the
midst of these seven-foot Martian men. I was all in white, the costume
used in the warm interior of the Grantline camp. Bareheaded, white
silk _Planetara_ uniform jacket, broad belt and tight-laced trousers.
Anita was a slim black figure beside me, somber as Hamlet, with her
pale boyish face and wavy black hair.
The gravity being maintained here on the ship we had found to be
stronger than that of the Moon--rather more like Mars.
"There are the heat-rays, Gregg."
  *  *  *  *  *
A pile of them was visible down the deck-length. And I saw caskets of
fragile glass globes, bombs of different styles; hand-projectors of
the paralyzing ray; search-beams of several varieties; the Benson
curve-light, and a few side-arms of ancient Earth-design--swords and
dirks, and small bullet projectors.
There seemed to be some mining equipment also. Far along the deck,
beyond the central cabin in the open space of the stern, steel rails
were stacked; half a dozen small-wheeled ore-carts; a tiny motor
engine for hauling them--and what looked as though it might be the
dismembered sections of an ore-shute.
The whole deck was presently strewn with this mass of equipment.
Potan moved about, directing the different groups of workers. The
news had spread that we knew the location of the treasure. The
brigands were jubilant. In a few hours the ship's armament would be
ready, and it would advance to attack Grantline.
I saw many glances being cast out the dome side-windows toward the
distant, far-down plains of the Mare Imbrium. The brigands believed
that the Grantline camp lay in that direction.
Anita whispered, "Which is their giant electronic projector, Gregg?"
I could see it amidships of the deck. It was already in place. Potan
was there now, superintending the men who were connecting it. The most
powerful weapon on the ship, it had, Potan said, an effective range of
some ten miles. I wondered what it would do to a Grantline building!
The Erentz double walls would withstand it for a time, I was sure. But
it would blast an Erentz fabric-suit, no doubt of that. Like a
lightning bolt, it would kill--its flashing free-stream of electrons
shocking the heart, bringing instant death.
I whispered, "We must smash that before we leave! But first turn it on
Miko, if he signals now."
  *  *  *  *  *
I was tensely watchful for that signal. The electronic projector
obviously was not yet ready. But when it was connected, I must be near
it, to persuade its duty-man to fire it on Miko. With this done we
would have more time to plan our other tasks. I did not think Potan
would be ready for his attack before another time of sleep here in the
ship's routine. Things would be quieter then--I would watch my chance
to send a signal to Earth, and then we would escape.
With my thoughts roving, we had been standing quietly at the cubby
door-oval for perhaps fifteen minutes. My hand in my side pouch
clutched the little bullet projector. The brigands had taken it from
me and given it to Potan. He had placed it on the settle with my
Erentz suit; and when we gained his confidence he had forgotten it
and left it there. I had it now, and the feel of its cool sleek handle
gave me a measure of comfort. Things could go wrong so easily--but if
they did, I was determined to sell my life as dearly as possible. And
a vague thought was in my mind: I must not use the last bullet. That
would be for Anita.
I shook myself free from such sinister fancy.
"That electronic projector is remote-controlled. Look, Anita--that's
the signal room over us. The giant projector will be aimed and fired
from up there."
It seemed so. A thirty-foot skeleton tower stood on the deck near us,
with a spiral ladder leading up to a small square steel cubby at the
top. Through the cubby window-ovals I could see instrument panels. A
single Martian was up there; he had called down to Potan concerning
the electronic projector.
  *  *  *  *  *
The roof of this little tower room was close under the dome--a space
of no more than four feet. A pressure lock-exit in the dome was up
there, with a few steps leading up to it from the roof of the tower
signal-room. We could escape that way, perhaps. In the event of dire
necessity it might be possible. But only as a desperate resort, for it
would put us on the top of the glassite dome, with a sheer hundred
feet or more down its sleek bulging exterior side, and down the
outside bulge of the ship's hull, to the rocks below. There might be a
spider ladder outside leading downward, but I saw no evidence of it.
If Anita and I were forced to escape that way, I wondered how we could
manage a hundred foot jump to the rocks and land safely. Even with the
slight gravity of the Moon it would be a dangerous fall.
"You are Gregg Haljan?"
I started as one of the brigands, coming up behind us, addressed me.
"Yes."
"Commander Potan tells me you were chief navigator of the
_Planetara_?"
"Yes."
"You shall pilot us when we advance upon the Grantline camp. I am
control-commander here--Brotow, my name."
He smiled. A giant fellow, but spindly. He spoke good English. He
seemed anxious to be friendly.
"We are glad to have you and George Prince's sister with us." He shot
Anita an admiring glance. "I will show you our controls, Haljan."
"All right," I said. "Whatever I can do to help...."
"But not now. It will be some hours before we are ready."
I nodded, and he wandered away. Anita whispered:
"Did he mean that signal room up here in the tower? Oh, Gregg, maybe
it's only the ship's control room!"
"I don't know. But the projector range-finders are up there, and I
think it's the signal room."
"Suppose we go up and see? Gregg, Miko's signals might start any
minute."
  *  *  *  *  *
And the electronic projector now seemed about ready. It was time for
me to act. But a reluctant instinct was upon me. Our Erentz suits were
here close behind us in Potan's cubby. I hated to leave them: if
anything happened and we had to make a sudden dash, there would be no
time to garb ourselves in the suits. To adjust the helmets was bad
enough.
I whispered swiftly, "We must get into our suits--find some pretext."
I drew her back through the cubby doorway where we would be more
secluded.
"Anita, listen: I've been a fool not to plan our escape more
carefully! We're in too great a danger here."
It seemed to me suddenly that we were in desperate plight. Was it
premonition?
"Anita, listen: if anything happens and we have to make a dash--"
"Up through that dome-lock, Gregg? It's a manual control; you can see
the levers."
"Yes. It's a manual. But up there--how would we get down?"
She was far calmer than I. "There may be an outside ladder, Gregg."
"I don't think so. I haven't seen it."
"Then we can get out the way they brought us in. The hull-porte--it's
a manual, too."
"Yes, I think I can find our way down through the hull corridors. I
mean, for a quick run. If we have to run, you stay close behind me.
I've this bullet projector, and evidently there aren't many men in the
lower corridors."
"There are guards outside on the rocks."
We had seen them through the dome windows. But there were not
many--only two or three. A surprise rush at them would turn the trick.
  *  *  *  *  *
We donned our Erentz suits.
"What will we do with the helmets?" Anita demanded. "Leave them here?"
"No--take them with us. I'm not going to get separated from them; it's
too dangerous."
"We'll look strange going up to that signal room equipped like this,"
she commented.
"I can't help it. We'll figure out something to explain it."
She stood before me, a queer-looking little figure in the now
deflated, bagging suit with her slim neck and head protruding above
the metal circle of its collar.
"Carry your helmet, Anita. I'll take mine."
We could adjust the helmets and start the Erentz motors all within a
few seconds.
"I'm ready, Gregg."
"Come on, then. Let me go first."
I had the bullet projector in an outer pouch of the suit where I could
instantly reach it. This was more rational: we had a fighting chance
now. The fear which had swept me so suddenly began to recede. I was
calm.
"We'll climb the tower to the signal room," I whispered. "Do it
boldly."
We stepped from the cubby. Potan was not in sight; he was on the
further deck beyond the central cabin structure perhaps, or had gone
below.
On the deck, we were immediately accosted. This was different--our
appearance in the Erentz suits!
"Where are you going?"
This fellow spoke in Martian. I answered in English.
"Up there."
  *  *  *  *  *
He stood before us, towering over me. I saw a group of nearby workers
stop to regard us. In a moment we would be causing a commotion, and it
was the last thing I desired.
I said in Martian, "Commander Potan told me, what I wish I can do.
From the dome we look around--see where is the Grantline camp--I am
pilot of this ship to go there."
The man who had called himself Brotow passed near us. I appealed to
him.
"We put on our suits. I thought we might go up on the dome for a
minute and look around. If I'm to pilot the ship...."
He hesitated, his glance sweeping the deck as though to ask Potan.
Someone said in Martian:
"The commander is down in the stern storeroom."
It decided Brotow. He waved away the Martian who had stopped me.
"Let them alone."
Anita and I gave him our most friendly smiles.
"Thanks."
He bowed to Anita with a sweeping gesture. "I will show you over the
control room presently."
His gaze went to the peak of the bow. The little hooded cubby there
was the control room. Satisfaction swept me. Then this, above us in
the tower, must surely be the signal room. Would Brotow follow us up?
I hoped not. I wanted to be alone with the duty-man up there, giving
me a chance to get at the projector controls if Miko's signal should
come.
I drew Anita past Brotow, who had stood aside. "Thanks," I repeated.
"We won't be long."
We mounted the little ladder.
CHAPTER XXXI
_In the Tower Cubby_
"Hurry, Anita!"
I feared that Potan might come up from the hull at any moment and stop
us. The duty-man over us gazed down, his huge head and shoulders
blocking the small signal room window. Brotow called up in Martian,
telling him to let us come. He scowled, but when we reached the trap
in the room floor-grid, we found him standing aside to admit us.
I flung a swift glance around. It was a metallic cubby, not much over
fifteen feet square, with an eight-foot arched ceiling. There were
instrument panels. The range-finder for the giant projector was here;
its little telescope with the trajectory apparatus and the firing
switch were unmistakable. And the signalling apparatus was here! Not a
Martian set, but a fully powerful Botz ultra-violet helio sender with
its attendant receiving mirrors. The _Planetara_ had used the Botz
system, so I was thoroughly familiar with it. I saw, too, what seemed
to be weapons: a row of small fragile glass globes, hanging on clips
along the wall--bombs, each the size of a man's fist. And a broad belt
with bombs in its padded compartments.
My heart was pounding as my first quick glance took in these details.
I saw also that the room had four small oval window openings. They
were breast-high above the floor; from the deck below I knew that the
angle of vision was such that the men down there could not see into
this room except to glimpse its upper portion near the ceiling. And
the helio set was banked on a low table near the floor.
In a corner of the room a small ladder led through a ceiling trap to
the cubby roof. This upper trap was open. Four feet above the
room-roof was the arch of the dome, with the entrance to the upper
exit-lock directly above us. The weapons and the belt of bombs were
near this ascending ladder, evidently placed here as equipment for use
from the top of the dome.
  *  *  *  *  *
I turned to the solitary duty-man. I must gain his confidence at once.
Anita had laid her helmet aside. She spoke first.
"We were with Set Miko," she said smilingly, "in the wreck of the
_Planetara_. You heard of it? We know where the treasure is."
This duty-man was a full seven feet tall, and the most heavy-set
Martian I had ever seen. A tremendous, beetling-browed, scowling
fellow. He stood with hands on his hips, his leather-garbed legs
spread wide; and as I fronted him I felt like a child. He was silent,
glaring down at me as I drew his attention from Anita.
"You speak English? We are not skilled with Martian."
I wondered if at the next time of sleep this fellow would be on duty
here. I hoped not; it would not be easy to trick him and find an
opportunity to flash a signal. But that task was some hours away as
yet; I would worry about it when the time came. Just now I was
concerned with Miko and his little band, who at any moment might
arrive in sight. If we could persuade this scowling duty-man to turn
the projector on them....
He answered me in ready English:
"You are the man Gregg Haljan? And this is the sister of George
Prince--what do you want up here?"
"I am a navigator. Brotow wants me to pilot the ship when we advance
to attack Grantline."
"This is not the control room."
"No, I know it isn't."
I put my helmet carefully on the floor-grid beside Anita's. I
straightened to find the brigand gazing at her. He did not speak; he
was still scowling. But in the dim blue glow of the cubby I caught the
look in his eyes.
  *  *  *  *  *
I said hastily, "Grantline knows your ship has landed here on
Archimedes. His camp is off there on the Mare Imbrium. He sent up a
signal--you saw it, didn't you?--just before Miss Prince and I came
aboard. He was trying to pretend that he was your Earth-party, Miko
and Coniston."
"Why?"
The fellow turned his scowl on me, but Anita brought his gaze back to
her. She put in quickly:
"Grantline, as Brother always said, has no great cunning. I believe
he's planning now to creep up on us, catch us unaware by pretending
that he is Miko."
"If he does that," I said, "we will turn this electronic projector on
him and annihilate him. You have its firing mechanism here."
"Who told you so?" he shot at me.
I gestured. "I see it here. It's obvious. I'm skilled at
trajectory-firing. If Grantline appears down there now, I'll help
you--"
"Is it connected?" Anita demanded boldly.
"Yes," he said. "You have on your Erentz suits: are you going to the
dome-roof? Then go."
But that was what we did not want to do. Anita's glance seemed to tell
me to let her handle this. I turned toward one of the cubby windows;
she said sweetly:
"Are you in charge of this room? Show me how that projector is
operated; it will be invincible against the Grantline camp."
"Yes."
  *  *  *  *  *
I had my back to them for a moment. Through the breast-high oval I
could see down across the deck-space and out through the side dome
windows. And my heart suddenly leaped into my throat. It seemed that
down there in the Earthlit shadows, where the spreading base of the
giant crater joined the plains, a light was bobbing. I gazed,
stricken. Miko's lights? Was he advancing, preparing to signal? I
tried to gauge the distance; it was not over two miles from here.
Or was it not a light at all? With the naked eye, I could not be sure.
Perhaps there was a telescopic finder here in the cubby....
I was subconsciously aware of the voices of Anita and the duty-man
behind me. Then abruptly I heard Anita's low cry. I whirled around.
The giant Martian had gathered her into his huge arms, his
heavy-jowled gray face with a leering grin close to hers!
He saw me coming. He held her with one arm: his other flung at me,
caught me, knocked me backward. He rasped:
"Get out of here! Go up to the dome, leave us."
Anita was silently struggling with her little hands at his thick
throat. His blow flung me against a settle. But I held my feet. I was
partly behind him. I leaped again, and as he tried to disengage
himself from Anita to front me, her clutching fingers impeded him.
My bullet projector was in my hand. But in that second as I leaped, I
had the sense to realize I should not fire it and with its noise alarm
the ship. I grasped its barrel, reached upward and struck with its
heavy metal butt. The blow caught the Martian on the skull, and
simultaneously my body struck him.
We went down together, falling partly upon Anita. But the giant had
not cried out, and as I gripped him now, I felt his body limp. I lay
panting. Anita squirmed silently from under us. Blood from the giant's
head was welling out, hot and sticky against my face as I lay sprawled
on him.
  *  *  *  *  *
I cast him off. He was dead, his fragile Martian skull split open by
my blow.
There had been no alarm. The slight noise we made had not been heard
down on the busy deck. Anita and I crouched by the floor. From the
deck all this part of the room could not be seen.
"Dead!"
"Oh, Gregg--"
It forced our hand. I could not wait now for Miko to come. But I could
flash the Earth signal now, and then we would have to make our run to
escape.
Abruptly I remembered that light down at the crater-base! I kept Anita
out of sight on the floor and went cautiously to a window. The deck
was in turmoil with brigands moving about excitedly. Not because of
what had happened in our tower signal room; they were unaware of that.
Miko's signals were showing! I could see them now plainly, down at the
crater-base. A group of hand-lights and a small waving helio-beam.
And they were being answered from the ship! Potan was on the deck--a
babble of voices, above which his rose with roars of command. At one
of the dome windows a brigand with a hand search-beam was sending its
answering light. And I saw that Potan was working over a deck
telescope-finder.
It had all come so suddenly that I was stunned. But I did not wait to
read the signals. I swung back at Anita.
"It's Miko! And they are answering him! Get your helmet; I'll try
firing the projector."
Or would I instead try to send a brief flash-signal to Earth? There
would be no time to do both: we must escape out of here. The route up
through the dome was the only feasible one now.
This range mechanism of the projector was reasonably familiar, and I
felt that I could operate it. The range-finder and switch were on a
ledge at one of the windows. I rushed to it. As I swung the little
telescope, training it down on Miko's lights, I could see the huge
projector on the deck swinging similarly. Its movement surprised the
men who were attending it. One of them called up to me, but I ignored
him.
  *  *  *  *  *
Then Potan looked up and saw me. He shouted in Martian at the
duty-man, whom he doubtless thought was behind me: "Be ready! We may
fire on them, whoever they are. I'll give you the word."
The signals were proceeding. It had only been a moment. I caught
something like, "_Haljan is impostor._"
I was aiming the projector. I was aware of Anita at my elbow. I pushed
her back.
"Put on your helmet!"
I had the range. I flung the firing switch.
At the deck window the giant projector spat its deadly electronic
stream. The men down there leaped away from it with surprise. I heard
Potan's voice, his shout of protest and anger.
But down in the Earthglow at the crater-base, Miko's lights had not
vanished! I had missed! An error in the range? Abruptly I knew it was
not that. Miko's lights were still there. His signals still coming.
And I remarked now a faint distortion about them, the glow of his
little group of hand-lights faintly distorted and vaguely shot with a
greenish cast. Benson curve-lights! I realized it.
My thoughts whirled in the few seconds while I stood there at the
tower window. Miko had feared he might summarily be fired upon. He had
gone back to his camp, equipped all his lights with the Benson curve.
He was somewhere at the crater-base now. But not where I thought I saw
him! The Benson curve-light changed the path of the light-rays
traveling from him to me--I could not even approximate his true
position!
Anita was plucking at me. "Gregg, come."
"I can't hit him!" I gasped.
Should I try the flash-signal to Earth? Did we dare linger here? I
stood another few seconds fascinated at the window. I saw Potan down
in the confusion of the deck, training a telescope. He had shouted up
violently at his duty-man here not to fire again.
And now he suddenly let out a roar. "I can see them! It's Miko! By the
Almighty--his giant stature--Brotow, look! That's not an Earthman!"
He flung aside his little telescope finder. "Disconnect that
projector! It's Miko down there! This Haljan is a trickster! Where is
he? Braile--Braile, you accursed fool! Are Haljan and the girl up
there with you?"
But the duty-man lay weltering in his blood at our feet.
I had dropped back from the window. Anita and I crouched for an
instant in confusion, fumbling with our helmets.
The ship rang with the alarm. And amid the turmoil we could hear the
shouts of the infuriated brigands swarming up the tower ladder after
us!
CHAPTER XXXII
_A Speck Amid the Stars_
I was only inactive a moment. I had thought Anita would have on her
helmet. But she was reluctant, or confused.
"Gregg."
"We've got to get out of here! Up through the overhead locks to the
dome."
"Yes--" She fumbled with the helmet. Under the floor-grid the climbing
men on the ladder were audible. They were already nearing the top. The
trap door was closed: Anita and I were crouching on it. There was a
thick metal bar set in a depressed groove of the grid. I slid it in
place--it would seal the trap for a time, at any rate.
A degree of confidence came to me. We had a few moments before there
could be any hand-to-hand conflict. That giant electronic projector
would eventually be used against Grantline: it was the brigands' most
powerful weapon. Its controls were here--by Heaven, I would smash
them! That at least I could do!
I jumped for the window. Miko's signals had stopped, but I caught a
glimpse of his distant moving curve-lights.
A flash came up at me, as in the window I became visible to the
brigands on the ship's deck. It was a small hand-projector, hastily
fired, for it went wide of the window. It was followed by a rain of
small beams, but I was warned and I dropped my head beneath the high
sill. The rays flashed diagonally upward through the oval opening,
hissed against our vaulted roof. The air snapped and tingled with a
shower of blue-red sparks, and the acrid odor of the released gases
settled down upon me.
  *  *  *  *  *
The trajectory controls of the projector were beside me. I seized
them, ripped and tore at them. There was a roar down on the deck. The
projector had exploded. A man's agonized scream split the confusion of
sounds.
It silenced the brigands on the deck. Under our floor-grid those on
the ladder had been pounding at the trap-door. They stopped, evidently
to see what had happened. The bombardment of our windows ceased
momentarily.
I cautiously peered out the window again. In the wreck of the
projector three men were lying. One of them was screaming horribly.
The dome-side was damaged. Potan and other men were frantically
investigating to see if the ship's air were hissing out.
A triumph swept me. They had not found me so meek and inoffensive as
they might have thought!
Anita clutched at me. She still had not donned her helmet.
"Put it on!"
"But Gregg--"
"Put it on!"
"I--I don't want to put it on until you put yours on."
"I've smashed the projector! We've stopped them coming up for a
while."
But they were still on the ladder under our floor. They heard our
voices; they began thumping again. Then pounding. They seemed now to
have some heavy implement. They rammed with it against the trap.
But the floor seemed holding. The square of metal grid trembled,
yielded a little. But it was good for a few minutes longer.
I called down, "The first one who comes through will be shot." My
words mingled with their oaths. There was a moment's pause, then the
ramming went on. The dying man on the deck was still screaming.
  *  *  *  *  *
I whispered, "I'll try an Earth-signal."
She nodded. Pale, tense, but calm. "Yes, Gregg. And I was thinking--"
"It won't take a minute. Have your helmet ready."
"I was thinking--"
She hurried across the room. I swung on the Botz signaling apparatus.
It was connected. Within a moment I had it humming. The fluorescent
tubes lighted with their lurid glare; they painted purple the body of
the giant duty-man who lay sprawled at my feet. I drew on all the
ship's power. The tube-lights in the room quivered and went dim.
I would have to hurry. Potan could shut this off from the main hull
control room. I could see, through the room's upper trap, the primary
sending mirror mounted in the peak of the dome. It was quivering,
radiant with its light-energy. I sent the flash.
The flattened, past-full Earth was up there. I knew that the western
hemisphere faced the Moon at this hour. I flashed in English, with the
open Universal Earth-code:
"_Help! Grantline._"
And again: "_Send help! Archimedes region near Apennines. Attacked by
brigands. Send help at once! Grantline!_"
If only it would be received! I flung off the current. Anita stood
watching me intently. "Gregg, look!"
She had taken some of the glass globe-bombs which lay by the foot of
the ascending ladder. She held some of them now.
"Gregg. I threw some."
  *  *  *  *  *
At the window we gazed down. The globes she flung had shattered on the
deck. They were occulting darkness bombs.[5]
[Footnote 5: Filled with an odorless, harmless gas, these bombs were
used in warfare, taking the place of the old-fashioned smoke screens.
The diffusing gas was of such a nature that, when released, it
absorbed within itself all the color inherent to the light-rays
striking it, thus creating a temporary darkness.]
Through the blackness of the deck, the shouts of the brigands came up.
They were stumbling about. But the ramming of our trap went on, and I
saw that it was beginning to yield. One corner of it was bent up.
"We've got to go, Anita!"
"Yes."
From out of the darkness which hung like a shroud over the deck an
occasional flash came up, unaimed--wide of our windows. But the
darkness was dissipating. I could see now the dim glow of the deck
lights, blurred as through a heavy fog.
I dropped another of the bombs.
"Put on your helmet."
"Yes--yes, I will. You put on yours."
We had them adjusted in a moment. Our Erentz motors were pumping.
I gripped her. "Put out your helmet-light."
She extinguished it. I handed her my bullet projector.
"Hold it a moment. I'm going to take that belt of bombs."
The trap-door was all but broken under the ramming blows of the men on
the ladder. I leaped over the body of the duty-man, seized the belt of
bombs and strapped it about my waist.
Anita stood with me.
"Give me the projector."
She handed it to me. The trap-door burst upward! A man's head and
shoulders appeared. I fired a bullet into him--the little leaden
pellet singing down through the yellow powder-flash that spat from the
projector's muzzle.
  *  *  *  *  *
The brigand screamed, and dropped back out of sight. There was
confusion at the ladder-top. I flung a bomb at the broken trap. A tiny
heat-ray came wavering up through the opening, but went wide of us.
The instrument room was in darkness. I clung to Anita.
"Hold on to me! You go first--here is the ladder."
We found it in the blackness, mounted it and went through the cubby's
roof-trap.
I took a hasty look and dropped another bomb beside us. The four-foot
space up here between the cubby roof and the overhead dome went black.
We were momentarily concealed.
Anita located the manual levers of the lock-entrance.
"Here, Gregg."
I shoved at them. Fear leaped in me that they would not operate. But
they swung. The tiny porte opened wide to receive us. We clambered
into the small air-chamber; the door slid closed, just as a flash from
below struck at it. The brigands had seen our little cloud of darkness
and were firing up through it.
We were through the locks in a moment, out on the open dome-top. A sleek,
rounded spread of glassite, with broad aluminite girders. There were
cross-ribs which gave us footing, and occasional projections--streamline
fin-tips, the casings of the upper rudder shafts, and the upstanding
stubby funnels into which the helicopters were folded.
We moved along the central footpath and crouched by a six-foot casing.
The stars and the glowing Earth were over us. The curving dome-top--a
hundred feet or so in length, and bulging thirty feet wide beneath
us--glistened in the Earthlight. It was a sheer drop down these
curving sides past the ship's hull, a hundred feet to the rocks on
which the vessel rested. The towering wall of Archimedes was beside
us; and beyond the brink of the ledge the thousands of feet down to
the plains.
  *  *  *  *  *
I saw the lights of Miko's band down there. He had stopped signaling.
His little lights were spread out, bobbing as he and his men advanced
up the crater's foothills, coming to join their ship.
I had an instant's glimpse. Anita and I could not stay here. The
brigands would follow us up in a moment. I saw no exterior ladder. We
would have to take our chances and jump.
There were brigands down there on the rocks. I saw three or four
skulking helmeted figures, and they saw us! A bullet whizzed by us,
and then came the flash of a hand-ray.
I touched Anita. "Can you make the leap? Anita, dear...."
Again it seemed that this must be farewell.
"Gregg, dear one--oh, we've got to do it!"
Those waiting figures would pounce on us.
"Anita, lie here a moment."
I jumped up and ran twenty feet toward the bow; then back, toward the
stern, flinging down the last of my bombs. The darkness was like a
cloud down there, enveloping the outer brigands. But up here we were
above it, etched by the starlight and Earthglow.
I came back to Anita.
"We'll have to chance it now."
"Gregg...."
"Good-by, dear. I'll jump first, down this side--you follow."
To leap into that black patch, with the rocks under it....
"Gregg--"
She was trying to tell me to look overhead. She gestured. "Gregg,
see!"
I saw it out over the plains--a little speck amid the stars. A moving
speck, coming toward us!
"Gregg, what is it?"
  *  *  *  *  *
I gazed, held my breath. A moving speck out there. A blob now.
And then I realized that it was not a large object, far away, but
small, and already very close--only a few hundred feet off, dropping
toward the top of our dome. A narrow, flat, ten-foot object, like a
wingless volplane. There were no lights on it, but in the Earthlight I
could see two crouching, helmeted figures riding it.
"Anita! Don't you remember!"
I was swept with dawning comprehension. Back in the Grantline camp
Snap and I had discussed how to use the _Planetara's_ gravity plates.
We had gone to the wreck and secured them, had rigged this little
volplane flyer....
The brigands on the rocks saw it now. A flash went up at it. One of
the figures crouching on it opened a flexible fabric like a wing over
its side. I saw another flash from below, harmlessly striking the
insulated shield.
I gasped to Anita, "Light your helmet! It's from Grantline! Let them
see us!"
I stood erect. The little flying platform went over us, fifty feet up,
circling, dropping to the dome-top.
I waved my helmet-light. The exit-lock from below--up which we had
come--was near us. The advancing brigands were already in it! I had
forgotten to demolish the manuals. And I saw that the darkness down on
the rocks was almost gone now, dissipating in the airless night. The
brigands down there began firing up at us.
It was a confusion of flashing lights. I clutched at Anita.
"Come this way--run!"
The platform barely missed our heads. It sailed lengthwise of the
dome-top, and crashed silently on the central runway near the
stern-tip. Anita and I ran to it.
The two helmeted figures seized us, shoved us prone on the metal
platform. It was barely four feet wide: a low railing, handles with
which to cling, and a tiny hooded cubby in front, with banks of
controls.
"Gregg!"
"Snap!"
It was Snap and Venza. She seized Anita, held her crouching in place.
Snap flung himself face down at the controls.
The brigands in the lock were out on the dome now. I took a last shot
as we lifted. My bullet punctured one of them; he fell, slid
scrambling off the rounded dome and dropped out of sight.
Light-rays and silent flashes seemed to envelop us. Venza held the
side-shields higher.
We tilted, swayed crazily, and then steadied.
The ship's dome dropped away beneath us. The rocks of the open ledge
were under us. Then the abyss, with the moving climbing specks of
Miko's lights far down.
I saw, over the side-shield, the already distant brigand ship resting
on the ledge with the massive Archimedes' wall behind it. A confusion
back there of futile flashing rays.
It all faded into a remote glow as we sailed smoothly up into the
starlight and away, heading for the Grantline camp.
CHAPTER XXXIII
_Besieged!_
"Wake up, Gregg! They're coming!"
I forced myself to consciousness. "Coming--"
"Yes. Wake up!"
I leaped from my bunk, followed Snap with a rush into the corridor. We
had returned safely to the Grantline Camp. Anita and I found ourselves
exhausted from lack of sleep, our arduous climb of Archimedes and that
tense time on the brigand ship. On the flight back Snap had explained
how the landing of the ship on Archimedes was observed through the
Grantline telescope, using but little of its power for this local
range. They had read with amazement my signals to the brigands. Snap
had rushed to completion the first of our contemplated flying
platforms. Then he had seen Miko's signals from the crater-base, seen
the lights of the fight to capture Anita and me in the cubby, and had
come to rescue us.
Back at the camp we were given food, and Grantline forced me to try
and sleep.
"They'll be on us in a few hours, Gregg. Miko will have joined them by
now. He'll lead them to us. You must rest, for we need everyone at his
best."
And surprisingly, in the midst of the camp's turmoil of last minute
activities, I slept soundly, until Snap called me that the ship was
coming.
The corridor echoed with the tramp of Grantline's busy crew. But there
was no confusion now; a grim calmness had settled upon everyone.
Anita and Venza rushed up to join us. "It's in sight!"
  *  *  *  *  *
There was no need of going to the instrument room. From the windows
fronting the brink of the cliff the brigand ship was plainly visible.
It came sailing from Archimedes, a dark shape blurring the stars. All
its lights were extinguished save a single white search-beam in the
bow-peak, slanting diagonally down.
The beam presently caught our little group of buildings; its glare
shone in the windows as it clung for a moment. I could envisage the
triumphant curiosity, of Potan and his fellows up there, gazing along
the beam.
Then it swung away. The ship was at an altitude of no more than three
thousand feet when I first saw it, coming upon a level keel. Would it
circle over us, firing at us? Or sail past, after inspecting us? Or
land, perhaps, boldly crowded upon our little ledge?
We were ready--as ready as we could be with our meager equipment. The
camp was in a state of siege. The cliff-lights were extinguished: the
interior lights were dim, save in the workshops of the main building,
where the final assembling of Snap's other flying platforms and their
insulated protective shields was still in progress.
We had dimmed the lights to conserve our power, and to enable the
Erentz motors to run at full capacity. Our buildings would have to
withstand the brigand rays which soon would be upon us.
Outside on our dim, Earthlit cliff, the tiny lights showed where our
few guards were lurking. As I stood at the window watching the
oncoming ship, Grantline's voice sounded:
"Call in those men! Ring the call-lights, Franck!"
The siren buzzed over the camp's interior; the warning call-lights on
the roof brought in the outer guards. They came running to the
admission portes, which had been repaired after Miko disabled them.
  *  *  *  *  *
The guards came in. We dimmed our lights further. The treasure sheds
were black against the cliff behind us. No need for guards there--the
bulk of the ore was such that we reasoned the brigands would not
attempt to move it until our buildings were captured. But, if they
should try it, we were prepared to sally out with our hand-weapons and
defend it.
In the dim lights we crouched. A silence was upon us, save for the
clanging in the workshop down the corridor. Most of us wore our Erentz
suits, with helmets ready, though I am sure there was not a man of us
but who prayed he might not have to go out. At many of the
windows--our weakest points to withstand the rays--insulated fabric
shields were hung like curtains.
The brigand ship slowly advanced. It was soon over the opposite rim of
our little crater. Its search-beam swung about the rim and down into
the valley.
My thoughts ran like a turgid stream as I stood tensely watching.
Four hours ago I had sent that flash-signal to Earth. If it were
received, a patrol-ship could come to our rescue and arrive here in
another eight hours--or perhaps even less.
Ah, that "if!" _If_ the signal were received! _If_ the patrol-ship
were immediately available! _If_ it started at once....
Eight hours at the very least. I tried to assure myself that we could
hold out that long....
The brigand ship crossed the opposite crater-rim. It dropped lower. It
seemed poised over the crater-valley, almost at our own level and less
than two miles from us. Its search-beam vanished. For a moment it
hung, a sleek, cylindrical silver shape, gleaming in the Earthlight.
Snap looked at me and murmured, "It's descending."
It slowly settled, cautiously picked its landing-place amid the crags
and pits of the tumbled scarred valley floor. It came to rest, a vague
silver menacing shape lurking in the lower shadows, close at the foot
of the inner opposite crater-wall.
A few moments of tense waiting passed. Soon tiny lights were moving
down there, some out on the rocks near the ship, others up under its
deck-dome.
A stab of searchlight shot across the valley, swung along our ledge
and clung with its glaring ten-foot circle to the front of our main
building. Then a ray flashed.
The assault had begun!
(_To be concluded_)
[Advertisement:]
The Jovian Jest
_By Lilith Lorraine_
[Illustration: _The object shot forth another tentacle._]
[Sidenote: There came to our pigmy planet a radiant wanderer with a
message--and a jest--from the vasty universe.]
Consternation reigned in Elsnore village when the Nameless Thing was
discovered in Farmer Burns' corn-patch. When the rumor began to gain
credence that it was some sort of meteor from inter-stellar space,
reporters, scientists and college professors flocked to the scene,
desirous of prying off particles for analysis. But they soon
discovered that the Thing was no ordinary meteor, for it glowed at
night with a peculiar luminescence. They also observed that it was
practically weightless, since it had embedded itself in the soft sand
scarcely more than a few inches.
By the time the first group of newspapermen and scientists had reached
the farm, another phenomenon was plainly observable. The Thing was
growing!
Farmer Burns, with an eye to profit, had already built a picket fence
around his starry visitor and was charging admission. He also flatly
refused to permit the chipping off of specimens or even the touching
of the object. His attitude was severely criticized, but he stubbornly
clung to the theory that possession is nine points in law.
  *  *  *  *  *
It was Professor Ralston of Princewell who, on the third day after the
fall of the meteor, remarked upon its growth. His colleagues crowded
around him as he pointed out this peculiarity, and soon they
discovered another factor--pulsation!
Larger than a small balloon, and gradually, almost imperceptibly
expanding, with its viscid transparency shot through with opalescent
lights, the Thing lay there in the deepening twilight and palpably
shivered. As darkness descended, a sort of hellish radiance began to
ooze from it. I say hellish, because there is no other word to
describe that spectral, sulphurous emanation.
As the hangers-on around the pickets shudderingly shrank away from the
weird light that was streaming out to them and tinting their faces
with a ghastly, greenish pallor, Farmer Burns' small boy, moved by
some imp of perversity, did a characteristically childish thing. He
picked up a good-sized stone and flung it straight at the nameless
mass!
  *  *  *  *  *
Instead of veering off and falling to the ground as from an impact
with metal, the stone sank right through the surface of the Thing as
into a pool of protoplastic slime. When it reached the central core of
the object, a more abundant life suddenly leaped and pulsed from
center to circumference. Visible waves of sentient color circled round
the solid stone. Stabbing swords of light leaped forth from them,
piercing the stone, crumbling it, absorbing it. When it was gone, only
a red spot, like a bloodshot eye, throbbed eerily where it had been.
Before the now thoroughly mystified crowd had time to remark upon this
inexplicable disintegration, a more horrible manifestation occurred.
The Thing, as though thoroughly awakened and vitalized by its unusual
fare, was putting forth a tentacle. Right from the top of the
shivering globe it pushed, sluggishly weaving and prescient of doom.
Wavering, it hung for a moment, turning, twisting, groping. Finally it
shot straight outward swift as a rattler's strike!
Before the closely packed crowd could give room for escape, it had
circled the neck of the nearest bystander, Bill Jones, a cattleman,
and jerked him, writhing and screaming, into the reddish core.
Stupefied with soul-chilling terror, with their mass-consciousness
practically annihilated before a deed with which their minds could
make no association, the crowd could only gasp in sobbing unison and
await the outcome.
  *  *  *  *  *
The absorption of the stone had taught them what to expect, and for a
moment it seemed that their worst anticipations were to be realised. The
sluggish currents circled through the Thing, swirling the victim's body to
the center. The giant tentacle drew back into the globe and became itself
a current. The concentric circles merged--tightened--became one gleaming
cord that encircled the helpless prey. From the inner circumference of
this cord shot forth, not the swords of light that had powdered the stone
to atoms, but myriads of radiant tentacles that gripped and cupped the
body in a thousand places.
Suddenly the tentacles withdrew themselves, all save the ones that
grasped the head. These seemed to tighten their pressure--to swell and
pulse with a grayish substance that was flowing from the cups into the
cord and from the cord into the body of the mass. Yes, it was a
grayish something, a smokelike Essence that was being drawn from the
cranial cavity. Bill Jones was no longer screaming and gibbering, but
was stiff with the rigidity of stone. Notwithstanding, there was no
visible mark upon his body; his flesh seemed unharmed.
Swiftly came the awful climax. The waving tentacles withdrew
themselves, the body of Bill Jones lost its rigidity, a heaving motion
from the center of the Thing propelled its cargo to the surface--and
Bill Jones stepped out!
Yes, he stepped out and stood for a moment staring straight ahead,
staring at nothing, glassily. Every person in the shivering, paralysed
group knew instinctively that something unthinkable had happened to
him. Something had transpired, something hitherto possible only in the
abysmal spaces of the Other Side of Things. Finally he turned and
faced the nameless object, raising his arm stiffly, automatically, as
in a military salute. Then he turned and walked jerkily, mindlessly,
round and round the globe like a wooden soldier marching. Meanwhile
the Thing lay quiescent--gorged!
  *  *  *  *  *
Professor Ralston was the first to find his voice. In fact, Professor
Ralston was always finding his voice in the most unexpected places.
But this time it had caught a chill. It was trembling.
"Gentlemen," he began, looking down academically upon the motley crowd
as though doubting the aptitude of his salutation. "Fellow-citizens,"
he corrected, "the phenomenon we have just witnessed is, to the lay
mind, inexplicable. To me--and to my honorable colleagues (added as an
afterthought) it is quite clear. Quite clear, indeed. We have before
us a specimen, a perfect specimen, I might say, of a--of a--"
He stammered in the presence of the unnamable. His hesitancy caused
the rapt attention of the throng that was waiting breathlessly for an
explanation, to flicker back to the inexplicable. In the fraction of a
second that their gaze had been diverted from the Thing to the
professor, the object had shot forth another tentacle, gripping him
round the neck and choking off his sentence with a horrid rasp that
sounded like a death rattle.
Needless to say, the revolting process that had turned Bill Jones
from a human being into a mindless automaton was repeated with
Professor Ralston. It happened as before, too rapidly for
intervention, too suddenly for the minds of the onlookers to shake off
the paralysis of an unprecedented nightmare. But when the victim was
thrown to the surface, when he stepped out, drained of the grayish
smokelike essence, a tentacle still gripped his neck and another
rested directly on top of his head. This latter tentacle, instead of
absorbing _from_ him, visibly poured into him what resembled a
threadlike stream of violet light.
  *  *  *  *  *
Facing the cowering audience with eyes staring glassily, still in the
grip of the unknowable, Professor Ralston did an unbelievable thing.
He resumed his lecture at the exact point of interruption! But he
spoke with the tonelessness of a machine, a machine that pulsed to the
will of a dictator, inhuman and inexorable!
"What you see before you," the Voice continued--the Voice that no
longer echoed the thoughts of the professor--"is what you would call
an amoeba, a giant amoeba. It is I--this amoeba, who am addressing
you--children of an alien universe. It is I, who through this captured
instrument of expression, whose queer language you can understand, am
explaining my presence on your planet. I pour my thoughts into this
specialised brain-box which I have previously drained of its meager
thought-content." (Here the "honorable colleagues" nudged each other
gleefully.) "I have so drained it for the purpose of analysis and that
the flow of my own ideas may pass from my mind to yours unimpeded by
any distortion that might otherwise be caused by their conflict with
the thoughts of this individual.
"First I absorbed the brain-content of this being whom you call Bill
Jones, but I found his mental instrument unavailable. It was
technically untrained in the use of your words that would best convey
my meaning. He possesses more of what you would call 'innate
intelligence,' but he has not perfected the mechanical brain through
whose operation this innate intelligence can be transmitted to others
and, applied for practical advantage.
  *  *  *  *  *
"Now this creature that I am using is, as you might say, full of sound
without meaning. His brain is a lumber-room in which he has hoarded a
conglomeration of clever and appropriate word-forms with which to
disguise the paucity of his ideas, with which to express nothing! Yet
the very abundance of the material in his storeroom furnishes a
discriminating mind with excellent tools for the transportation of its
ideas into other minds.
"Know, then, that I am not here by accident. I am a Space Wanderer, an
explorer from a super-universe whose evolution has proceeded without
variation along the line of your amoeba. Your evolution, as I perceive
from an analysis of the brain-content of your professor, _began_ its
unfoldment in somewhat the same manner as our own. But in your smaller
system, less perfectly adjusted than our own to the cosmic mechanism,
a series of cataclysms occurred. In fact, your planetary system was
itself the result of a catastrophe, or of what might have been a
catastrophe, had the two great suns collided whose near approach
caused the wrenching off of your planets. From this colossal accident,
rare, indeed, in the annals of the stars, an endless chain of
accidents was born, a chain of which this specimen, this professor,
and the species that he represents, is one of the weakest links.
"Your infinite variety of species is directly due to the variety of
adaptations necessitated by this train of accidents. In the
super-universe from which I come, such derangements of the celestial
machinery simply do not happen. For this reason, our evolution has
unfolded harmoniously along one line of development, whereas yours
has branched out into diversified and grotesque expressions of the
Life-Principle. Your so-called highest manifestation of this
principle, namely, your own species, is characterized by a great
number of specialized organs. Through this very specialization of
functions, however, you have forfeited your individual immortality,
and it has come about that only your life-stream is immortal. The
primal cell is inherently immortal, but death follows in the wake of
specialization.
  *  *  *  *  *
"We, the beings of this amoeba universe, are individually immortal. We
have no highly specialized organs to break down under the stress of
environment. When we want an organ, we create it. When it has served
its purpose, we withdraw it into ourselves. We reach out our tentacles
and draw to ourselves whatsoever we desire. Should a tentacle be
destroyed, we can put forth another.
"Our universe is beautiful beyond the dreams of your most inspired
poets. Whereas your landscapes, though lovely, are stationary,
unchangeable except through herculean efforts, ours are Protean,
eternally changing. With our own substance, we build our minarets of
light, piercing the aura of infinity. At the bidding of our wills we
create, preserve, destroy--only to build again more gloriously.
"We draw our sustenance from the primates, as do your plants, and we
constantly replace the electronic base of these primates with our own
emanations, in much the same manner as your nitrogenous plants
revitalize your soil.
"While we create and withdraw organs at will, we have nothing to
correspond to your five senses. We derive knowledge through one sense
only, or, shall I say, a super-sense? We see and hear and touch and
taste and smell and feel and know, not through any one organ, but
through our whole structure. The homogeneous force of our
omni-substance subjects the plural world to the processing of a
powerful unity.
  *  *  *  *  *
"We can dissolve our bodies at will, retaining only the permanent atom
of our being, the seed of life dropped on the soil of our planet by
Infinite Intelligence. We can propel this indestructible seed on light
rays through the depths of space. We can visit the farthest universe
with the velocity of light, since light is our conveyance. In reaching
your little world, I have consumed a million years, for my world is a
million light-years distant: yet to my race a million years is as one
of your days.
"On arrival at any given destination, we can build our bodies from the
elements of the foreign planet. We attain our knowledge of conditions
on any given planet by absorbing the thought-content of the brains of
a few representative members of its dominant race. Every well-balanced
mind contains the experience of the race, the essence of the wisdom
that the race-soul has gained during its residence in matter. We make
this knowledge a part of our own thought-content, and thus the
Universe lies like an open book before us.
"At the end of a given experiment in thought absorption, we return the
borrowed mind-stuff to the brain of its possessor. We reward our
subject for his momentary discomfiture by pouring into his body our
splendid vitality. This lengthens his life expectancy immeasurably, by
literally burning from his system the germs of actual or incipient
ills that contaminate the blood-stream.
  *  *  *  *  *
"This, I believe, will conclude my explanation, an explanation to which
you, as a race in whom intelligence is beginning to dawn, are entitled.
But you have a long road to travel yet. Your thought-channels are
pitifully blocked and criss-crossed with nonsensical and inhibitory
complexes that stand in the way of true progress. But you will work this
out, for the Divine Spark that pulses through us of the Larger Universe,
pulses also through you. That spark, once lighted, can never be
extinguished, can never be swallowed up again in the primeval slime.
"There is nothing more that I can learn from you--nothing that I can
teach you at this stage of your evolution. I have but one message to
give you, one thought to leave with you--forge on! You are on the
path, the stars are over you, their light is flashing into your souls
the slogan of the Federated Suns beyond the frontiers of your little
warring worlds. Forge on!"
The Voice died out like the chiming of a great bell receding into
immeasurable distance. The supercilious tones of the professor had
yielded to the sweetness and the light of the Greater Mind whose
instrument he had momentarily become. It was charged at the last with
a golden resonance that seemed to echo down vast spaceless corridors
beyond the furthermost outposts of time.
  *  *  *  *  *
As the Voice faded out into a sacramental silence, the strangely
assorted throng, moved by a common impulse, lowered their heads as
though in prayer. The great globe pulsed and shimmered throughout its
sentient depths like a sea of liquid jewels. Then the tentacle that
grasped the professor drew him back toward the scintillating nucleus.
Simultaneously another arm reached out and grasped Bill Jones, who,
during the strange lecture, had ceased his wooden soldier marching and
had stood stiffly at attention.
The bodies of both men within the nucleus were encircled once more by
the single current. From it again put forth the tentacles, cupping
their heads, but the smokelike essence flowed back to them this time,
and with it flowed a tiny threadlike stream of violet light. Then came
the heaving motion when the shimmering currents caught the two men and
tossed them forth unharmed but visibly dowered with the radiance of
more abundant life. Their faces were positively glowing and their eyes
were illuminated by a light that was surely not of earth.
Then, before the very eyes of the marveling people, the great globe
began to dwindle. The jeweled lights intensified, concentrated,
merged, until at last remained only a single spot no larger than a
pin-head, but whose radiance was, notwithstanding, searing,
excruciating. Then the spot leaped up--up into the heavens, whirling,
dipping and circling as in a gesture of farewell, and finally soaring
into invisibility with the blinding speed of light.
  *  *  *  *  *
The whole wildly improbable occurrence might have been dismissed as a
queer case of mass delusion, for such cases are not unknown to
history, had it not been followed by a convincing aftermath.
The culmination of a series of startling coincidences, both ridiculous
and tragic, at last brought men face to face with an incontestable
fact: namely, that Bill Jones had emerged from his fiery baptism
endowed with the thought-expressing facilities of Professor Ralston,
while the professor was forced to struggle along with the meager
educational appliances of Bill Jones!
In this ironic manner the Space-Wanderer had left unquestionable proof
of his visit by rendering a tribute to "innate intelligence" and
playing a Jovian Jest upon an educated fool--a neat transposition.
A Columbus from a vaster, kindlier universe had paused for a moment to
learn the story of our pigmy system. He had brought us a message from
the outermost citadels of life and had flashed out again on his aeonic
voyage from everlasting unto everlasting.
FOR VACATION ADVENTURERS
Truth is stranger than fiction. Ask the Regular Army man who has
soldiered in the far-off corners of the earth, gone "over the top" in
action, and has experienced the thrill of service in the tropics or
the sub-arctic.
Better yet, get an earful of real Astounding Stories yourself, at
first hand this summer, as one of the thirty thousand young men
between the ages of seventeen and twenty-four enjoying those thirty
glorious days and nights as a student-camper at one of Uncle Sam's
Citizens' Military Training Camps.
All of these Camps are pitched at Regular Army posts, and it is the
custom for grizzled old-timers who have followed the Flag for many
long years to drift down to "the boys" around campfire time each night
and regale the student campers with thrilling, real life yarns of
action and adventure in many strange and unusual circumstances.
It is not necessary for one to be a rich man's son in order to enjoy
the manifold benefits of their Camps. Uncle Sam pays all the necessary
bills including transportation, the best of food, bedding, laundry
service and medical treatment if needed. And there is no obligation
for future military service entailed by attendance at any of these
Nation-wide CMT camps. Their primary mission is the upbuilding of
American youth in health and good citizenship.
Detailed information, together with illustrated literature about the
Citizens' Military Training Camp, may be obtained by addressing the
CMTC Officer at the U.S. Army post nearest your home.
[Advertisement:]
The Atom-Smasher
_By Victor Rousseau_
[Illustration: _It was sublime and terrible, and on the result of that
conflict depended--what?_]
[Sidenote: Four destinies rocket through the strange Time-Space of the
Fourth Dimension in Tode's marvelous Atom-Smasher.]
CHAPTER I
_The "Vanishing Place"_
"Look at that plane! That fellow's crazy! Took off with the wind
behind him! He'll nose dive before he clears the clubhouse! He'll
crash into those trees along the edge of the golf course!"
The group on the field at Westbury, Long Island, held their breaths as
they watched James Dent take off in the wildest, most erratic flight
that they had ever seen. Under lowering storm clouds, with the wind
roaring half a hurricane behind him, Dent spiraled upward as if
unconscious of the laws of Earthly gravity.
"I told you so! You ought to have stopped him, even if it is his
private plane! A feller's got no business trying to break his neck!
Look there! He's cleared those trees after all!"
James Dent had cleared them, and the clubhouse too, and was already
disappearing across the Hempstead Plains, looking like a leaf whirling
up in a winter storm. At a height of five hundred feet he sped
eastward.
"Didn't tell you where he was going?"
"Nope, acted like a crazy man. Something on his mind sure. Wherever
he's bound for, he'll never get there!"
  *  *  *  *  *
But James Dent was already out of sight, and the little group
dispersed. And Dent, winging his way due east, over the oak barrens of
central Long Island, was conscious neither of the storm that howled
about him nor of the excitement that his rash take-off had occasioned.
The rain lashed him in the open cockpit, the ground fog swirled about
him, and, though it was still afternoon, there brooded a somber
twilight over the wastes. But in his mind Dent was already
anticipating his descent at the "Vanishing Place," as the natives
called it near Peconic Bay.
The "Vanishing Place" was so called because of the terrible and
inexplicable catastrophe that had occurred there five years
previously. In the two-century-old farmhouse, Miles Parrish, the
world's greatest authority on physical chemistry, had been conducting
investigations into the structure of the atom.
James Dent and Lucius Tode had been associated with old Parrish in
this work, which, carried to a successful issue, would revolutionize
the social organization of the world. The energy locked up in the atom
is so stupendous that, as Eddington indicated, a thimbleful of coal,
disintegrated, would carry the _Mauretania_ from England to America
and back again. To unlock this energy would be to set man free from
bondage, to restore the pristine leisure and happiness of Eden.
  *  *  *  *  *
And because the three men were playing with deadly forces, of
incalculable power, this deserted spot had been selected for the
carrying on of the investigations. The old farmhouse had been
converted into a laboratory. For days together the three had bent over
their tubes and laboratory apparatus, hardly eating or sleeping. And
the day had come when success had seemed almost within their grasp.
Dent had received six months' leave of absence from his duties at
Columbia University in order to prosecute the experiments. As the
weeks went by, and the blind track that the three were following
opened into a clear road, a sort of madness settled upon every one of
them.
The Planck-Bohr quantum theory that the energy of a body cannot vary
continuously, but only by a certain finite amount, or exact multiples
of this amount, had been the key that unlocked the door. But always it
had been Lucius Tode who led the way. Tode was a graduate of the
University of Virginia, and accounted one of the most brilliant minds
of his generation. At thirty, he stood head and shoulders above his
contemporaries.
Dark, handsome, fearless, with a will power that nothing seemed able
to subdue, he had taken the leadership away from old Miles Parrish,
who eagerly and without thought of his own reputation followed in his
assistant's footsteps.
There were the three men--and there was the girl, Lucille Parrish, the
child of Miles's old age. Seventeen, when the catastrophe occurred,
she had come out to the deserted spot sometimes of a Sunday from her
boarding school at Garden City.
And Tode had found time to make love to her when he rushed her back to
her school in his high-powered foreign car!
Jim Dent had known nothing of that until after the catastrophe.
Lucille had been afraid of him, afraid to open her mouth upon the
subject even to her father. And she had been fascinated too, as a
young girl may well be, when a fascinating man of thirty uses his arts
to win her.
  *  *  *  *  *
It was only by chance that Jim had failed to be involved in the
hideous catastrophe that had stamped the old farmhouse with the name
of "Vanishing Place" whenever the natives spoke of it.
"Two Killed in Laboratory Explosion!" was the heading in the next
morning's paper which gave Jim his first intimation of the accident.
He had been to Columbia overnight to look up a new publication that
contained an article on the hydrogen spectrum.
It was only a long paragraph, and the names of Parrish and Tode meant
nothing to the man who had written it. But Jim had taken train to
Hempstead, taxied to the flying fields, and essayed his first plane
ride to Peconic Bay, in the charge of a pilot.
A group of natives, three newspaper men and a Suffolk County policeman
were near the spot where the farmhouse had been--near the spot, not on
it.
For where the farmhouse had been was a great pool of stagnant water,
black as ink, covering an expanse of perhaps three-quarters of an
acre.
"No, sir, there was no explosion," said the officer. "At least, none
of these fellows heard anything. Just a--you tell the Professor, Mr.
Lumm."
"It was about half-past eight last night, Mr. Dent," said Andrew Lumm,
who kept the village store a mile away. "Ground seemed to rock.
Earthquake, I says to myself, holdin' on to the door. But it wasn't no
earthquake. Too gentle for that. Nothin' broke, not even a plate. Then
I says to Mrs. Lumm, 'They're gone, poor fellers, and I allus knowed
it would be that way. It's lucky young Mr. Dent went out last night on
the 7.15.'
"We hurried here, but there wasn't no sign of the place, jest a hole
on the ground with a sort of sticky mud in it. Water's been fillin' in
since then, but I guess it's reached its level now. They jest blowed
themselves to bits, Mr. Dent."
"Tell him about the vi'let light, Andy," put in one of the
bystanders.
"Yeah, like a pillar of vi'let fire that were, Mr. Dent. We seed it
through the trees, but by the time we got here it was 'most gone.
Gosh, that throwed a scare into some of us!"
"It was Mr. Tode's soul a-burnin'," squeaked Granpop Dawes. "I allus
said that feller'd come to no good end."
The group shook their heads and remained silent. It was clear that, if
they did not share Granpop Dawes's opinion, at least they considered
it not without the bounds of plausibility. Lucius Tode had created a
bad impression among the natives.
  *  *  *  *  *
Jim Dent stooped and picked up something lying imbedded in the mud at
the edge of the black pool, and slipped it into his pocket. He had
been present at the inquest and had gone back to Columbia. That had
been five years before.
Professor McDowd, the palaeontologist, had identified the object Jim
had found as the milk molar of _merychippus insignis_, the miocene
representative of the modern horse. And that had made Jim Dent think
furiously.
The catastrophe must have been a gigantic one to have flung up that
fossil tooth from strata far beneath the level of the earth's surface.
More, there were even traces of archaean deposits around the borders
of the pool, whose depth, in the center, was ascertained to be 164
feet.
Black, silent, uninhabited, unstirred save by a passing breeze, the
pool had remained those five years past. The spot was shunned as
haunted or accursed by the superstitious country folks. Dense
underbrush had grown up around it.
Periodically, Jim had gone out to visit it. That was how he had come
to invest in a private plane. It was only an hour to the
flying-fields, and less than an hour from there to Peconic Bay. What
he expected to achieve he did not know. In the back of his mind was
the belief that some day he would light upon some clue that would
tell something of the unusual catastrophe.
And then that afternoon he had been shaken to the depths when a
message came to him in Lucille's voice over the telephone:
"I've heard from dad!"
  *  *  *  *  *
Winging his way eastward through the storm, Jim Dent was mentally
reconstructing all that had led up to the present moment.
Lucille had finished her high school course and gone into business
life. Jim had found a position for her as secretary to a small group
of physicists, who were conducting private investigations, a position
for which her training well fitted her. She had done well. He had kept
in touch with her.
Six months before, their relations had altered. They had realized that
they were in love with each other. In the months that followed they
had discovered all sorts of things about each other that neither had
suspected, which might be summed up by saying that they had become all
in all to each other.
It was so amazing, this transformation of ordinary friendship into
radiant love, that they were still bewildered over it. They were to be
married at the end of the year.
It was then that Lucille had first told Jim about Lucius's wooing, and
her fear of the man. Apart from that, both had refrained, by tacit
agreement, from making reference to the past.
And then, that afternoon, there sounded Lucille's voice over the
telephone, "I've heard from dad!"
"From--your father? You're mistaken, dear!"
"No, Jim, I'm not mistaken. He called me on the 'phone two hours ago.
I couldn't mistake his voice, and, besides, he called me "Lucy," like
he used to do. He told me to come at once to the Vanishing Place, but
not to tell a soul unless I wished to do him a great evil. Then he
rang off."
"Where are you now?" asked Jim.
"I'm 'phoning from Amityville. I took the train immediately, but I
was so frightened, and--and at last I decide I must tell you. I didn't
think dad would have minded my telling you. So I got out. There's
another train in a few minutes, and I shall go on to Hampton Bays and
walk the two miles to the Vanishing Place. I--I'll meet you there."
"Lucille, wait! Can't you meet me somewhere else, and we'll go on
together. I'll get my plane and--"
"Oh, I just can't wait, Jim! I'm in such terror that I won't find dad
when I get there. And he told me to tell nobody. I--I'll meet you at
the Vanishing Place, Jim."
And so great had been her agitation that with that arrangement Jim had
had to rest content. He had taken a taxi out to the flying fields at
once.
  *  *  *  *  *
In half an hour he would know what had happened. And he was obsessed
by the terror that he would not find Lucille or anything except the
lonely pool.
That was why he opened the throttle and drove on wildly through the
scurrying wraiths of mist, pierced by the tops of trees that at times
rose dangerously near the spreading wings.
That gap in the trees was Lake Ronkokoma. Not far now! Jim would know
soon. But as he flew, vague fears that had beset his mind since he had
received Lucille's message began to crystallize into the single fear
of Tode. If Parrish was really alive--why not Tode too?
Beneath the polish and the surface comradeship, Jim had always been
conscious of some _diablerie_ about the man, of some inner life of
which he knew nothing. Something unscrupulous and relentless,
something infinitely cruel--as when he had tested the Atom Smasher on
a stray cur that had run into the laboratory, not for experimentation,
but in mere ruthless savagery, converting the living beast instantly
into a shapeless mass of flesh and bone.
And Tode had known more about the Atom Smasher--as they affectionately
called the mechanism for releasing atomic energy--than old Parrish and
he together. Suppose Lucille's story were true! Suppose old Parrish
were actually alive, suppose Tode were responsible for some designed
scheme which would, in the end place Lucille in his power!
Wild thoughts and fears--but Jim would soon know. And with throttle
stretched to the limit he went roaring over the scrub oak toward
Peconic Bay.
  *  *  *  *  *
It was beginning to grow dark, almost too dark for landing. But now
Jim could feel the tang of the salt wind upon his face. He slowed
down. The fog was as thick as ever, but the scrub oak had given place
to more open country. In a minute or two he ought to sight some
landmark. Yes, he had overshot his mark, for suddenly, through a gap
in the mists, he saw the line of breakers forming a white ridge upon
the sand.
A mile southward! Jim knew where he was now, for he knew every curve
of that shore. He banked and turned. And then he saw something that
for an instant chilled his blood.
Not far away, and not far beneath him, a ghostly violet haze was
spreading through the fog, and the fog itself was coiling back from it
until it formed a dense white wall.
For a moment Jim's hand was paralysed upon the stick. The next, his
decision was made. He closed his throttle and went down in a slow
descent right toward the heart of that column of lavender smoke that
seemed to be springing straight up out of the ground. "A pillar of
violet fire!" It could not have been described better.
The plane dived through the dense wall of fog, which for a moment shut
out the violet fire completely. Then Jim was through, and almost
immediately beneath him lay the black and glassy surface of the pool.
Out of the very heart of it rose the fire, burning like some infernal
flame that consumed nothing, and between it and the fog was a space of
almost translucent air, extending to the borders of the pool.
Jim began to circle the pool to find a landing-place. But as he looked
down, the surface of the pool began to change its aspect.
  *  *  *  *  *
In place of the unruffled calm, it began to work with some devil's
yeast all around the central pillar of flame, until its depths seemed
to be churned up in frothy masses and the movement extended almost to
the circumference. Then the whole surface of the water began to tilt
and sway with a slow, shimmering, undulatory movement, as if it was a
giant roulette wheel in rotation.
And something was materializing out of the heart of the violet flame
itself.
It was a face--a human face, with bestial features, distorted and
enormously magnified through the substance in which it was. Such a
face as might look back upon an observer out of one of those
distorting mirrors at Coney Island, or some other place of popular
amusement, but twisted and enlarged beyond conception, so that it
covered half the area of a city block.
Curiously blurred, too, as if each atom of that face was in isolated
motion on its own account. And beneath the face appeared the vague
outlines of a hand, apparently manipulating some sort of infernal
mechanism.
And that face, enlarged as it was out of all proportion, filled Jim's
heart with greater horror than any face he had ever known.
For it was the visage of Lucius Tode, and on those huge and distorted
features was something that looked like a diabolical smile.
  *  *  *  *  *
Everything vanished. Jim was back in the surrounding wall of fog.
Instinctively he banked again. He strove to drive the horror from his
brain. He must circle, circle incessantly, in the hope of finding
Lucille. She must have already arrived. But if she had not fallen
into Tode's power, she would hear the roaring of the plane and manage
to signal him.
He circled back into the clear space between the white and the violet,
and now he saw that the effect upon the pool was still more
pronounced. The waters were rising up in a rim all around, and yet not
overflowing. They were standing up like a bowl of clay upon the
potter's wheel, and down in the depths Jim could see the head and
shoulders of Tode, much less magnified, more natural in appearance,
and less blurred. And Tode was looking up at him and pointing that
infernal mechanism at him--something that looked like the tube of a
telescope.
Suddenly the plane shivered and stood still. The motor died abruptly.
The stick went dead. And yet the plane did not fall. As if upheld by
the same repulsive force that drove back the white fog, it simply hung
suspended three hundred feet above the heart of the violet flame.
Then--there was no longer any plane. The stick had melted in Jim's
hand, the wings dissolved like wreaths of mist. The entire body had
disintegrated into nothingness. Jim sat suspended in the void, and
felt himself very slowly descending into the violet column.
Down into the vortex of that bubbling pool, which rimmed him on all
sides ... down into the central aperture out of which emerged the
leering face of Tode! And as he dropped Jim heard, thin, faint, and
very far away, the despairing cry of Lucille....
CHAPTER II
_Old Friends--and Foes_
Jim must have lapsed into unconsciousness, for when he opened his eyes
there was a gap in his consciousness of the passage of time, though
none in his memory. He opened his eyes, and instantly he remembered
everything.
Only a brief interval could have elapsed, for it was not quite dark.
The fog and the violet flame had cleared away. Overhead a few stars
twinkled. Jim was lying on his side, half-buried in the black, slimy
mud of the dried up pool.
There was nothing but the smooth, shelving mud basin, with the scrub
oak surrounding it. Tode and the machine had vanished.
Jim pulled himself with an effort out of the sucking mud, and, heavily
clogged with it, began to make his way toward the margin.
Stumbling, struggling through the viscid ooze, he shouted Lucille's
name despairingly. But no answer came, and his cries only made the
utter silence all about him seem more fearsome.
Exhausted by his efforts, he gained the edge of the pool at last, and
stopped, trying to orientate himself. As he did so, he saw a human
face peering at him out of a clump of scrub oak.
It was the face of an aged man, with a long white beard and rags of
clothes that were festooned about him. Jim took a step toward it,
shouting a challenge. Next moment it had hurled itself out of its
shelter toward him, and two skeletonlike arms were twined about his
shoulders, while the fingers worked upward toward his throat.
The face was that of a madman, crazed by fear. And Jim recognized it.
It was the face of Professor Parrish.
Parrish, the trim, immaculate, clean-shaven, urbane old man, whose
lectures, imbued with wit and scholarship, had always been the delight
of his classes--Parrish reduced to this gibbering maniac! And yet
Parrish himself, returned to the site of their experiments after five
years!
  *  *  *  *  *
So fierce was the old man's onset, so desperate his clutch, that for a
half-minute or more Jim was reduced to fighting for his life. The
clawing fingers, armed with long nails, furrowed Jim's throat, there
was a terrific strength in the body, wasted though it was almost to a
skeleton.
But it was only for a half-minute that old Parrish's endurance lasted.
Suddenly the old man went limp and tottered forward, dropped upon the
ground. Jim bent over him.
"Parrish, you know me! I'm Jim Dent!" he cried. "I came here to save
you."
Parrish was muttering something. Jim caught the words "Tode," and "God
help Lucille!"
"Parrish, I'm Jim Dent!" Jim cried again, and the old man, shuddering,
opened his eyes and recognized him.
"Jim!" he muttered. "Jim Dent! Then where is she? I got away from that
devil, found farmhouse empty, got telephone book, found her and
'phoned her. Told her to come. Save--Lucille!"
He fell back, his eyes closed. Jim crouched over the unconscious old
man. He was in a state of utter perplexity. He could not quite gather
what Parrish had been trying to tell him, and it was with difficulty
that he could focus his mind upon the situation, so great had been the
shock of finding his former chief in that condition.
What had become of his plane, and where was Lucille? Jim was positive
that he had heard her cry for help out of the vortex in the water.
But there was no water, only the circle of black mud extended in the
starlight.
Again and again Jim shouted Lucille's name, and his cries went echoing
away through the scrub without result.
Jim looked down at the unconscious old man beside him. He must get
Parrish away, get him to Andy Lumm's. He bent over him again and
raised him in his arms.
  *  *  *  *  *
Suddenly he heard two familiar sounds behind him, two dull thumps that
sounded less like explosions than echoes, long drawn out, and receding
into infinity. There was no other sound quite like them that he had
ever heard.
They were the snap of the electrical discharge as the Atom Smasher
began to operate, and why the snap had sounded like a heavy body
falling a long distance away, was not known.
Tode had said one day, with what Jim had taken for sarcasm, that they
represented the wave series of a single sound extended in time to make
four-dimensional action, but Jim had never considered the explanation
seriously.
That sound, bringing back all Jim's memories of their experiments,
brought him to his feet sharply. He swung around. The surface of the
pool was a bubbling, seething mass of mud and water. And over its
surface that faint violet haze was beginning to spread.
In the center where the light was thickest, something like a gyroscope
appeared to be revolving. Out of the gyroscope something was beginning
to project--that infernal tube of Lucius Tode. And Jim knew that in
the heart of the flame that enormous, distorted face of Lucius Tode
would again be visible.
The human nervous system can only endure a certain amount of impact.
The sight of that ghastly flame, already condensing into a violet
pillar, was more than Jim could stand. He dragged old Parrish to his
feet and started off with him into the thickest part of the
undergrowth.
A fearful scream behind him stopped him at the very edge of the scrub.
He looked back, still supporting the half-conscious old man in his
arms. The violet flame was shooting up in a straight pillar, the whole
central portion of the pool was dry, and the waters were heaped up all
around it.
From the slightly elevated spot where Jim stood, he could see Tode
holding Lucille in his arms in the very heart of the fire, which threw
a pale, fluorescent light over their faces. Tode was wearing a spotted
skin, like that of a leopard, and Lucille was in the blue frock that
she had worn when Jim and she had dinner together two evenings
before.
Jim dropped old Parrish, shouted in answer, and dashed back like a
madman down the slope into the solid wall of water.
  *  *  *  *  *
He fought his way desperately through that wall, which seemed of the
consistency of soft rubber or treacle, as if some subtle change had
taken place in its molecular isomers. It adhered to him without
wetting him, and he plunged through it, hearing Lucille cry out again,
and yet again.
And now he was through, and once more struggling over the viscid
surface of the pond. Behind him he heard old Parrish blundering, and
screeching at the top of his voice, but he paid no attention to him.
He could see Lucille more clearly, and the large, hazy outlines of
Tode's features were beginning to assume the proper proportions. There
was a diabolical leer upon Tode's face, unchanged during the five
years since Jim had seen him last, except that it had become more
evil, more powerful. The enormous and distorted face that Jim had seen
had been simply due to the presence of some refracting medium.
The pillar of violet light was thinning, spreading out over the pool,
but Jim could now see the scene more clearly than before, even as he
rushed onward.
The machine was inside what looked like a flat boat, but more circular
than a boat, and apparently was made of some metal resembling
aluminum. Either from the metal hull or from the mechanism inside it
there was emitted a pungent odor resembling chlorine.
The mechanism itself bore some resemblance to the old Atom Smasher of
five years before, but it appeared to be immensely more complicated.
Wheels of various sizes were set at every conceivable angle around the
central tube, from which the violet light was emanating, and all were
rotating and gyrating so fast that they looked like discs of light.
The boat itself was trembling, and this movement appeared to be
communicated to the boiling mud in the central part of the pool.
  *  *  *  *  *
As Jim tried to leap down through the sucking mud to snatch Lucille
from Tode, the latter stopped, straightened himself, and pointed a
short tube at Jim's heart.
Jim felt as if an enormous, invisible force had struck him in the
chest. It was apparently the same repulsive force that had driven back
the waters. The shock was not a violent one. It did not throw him off
his feet. It merely pushed him slowly and irresistibly backward.
And the whole picture was beginning to fade. Etched sharply in the
violet light one moment, it now looked like a drawing that had been
covered with tissue paper.
The outlines were dissolving into a haze--or, rather, each line seemed
reproduced an infinite number of times, as the edge of a vibrating saw
shows an infinitude of edges. The violet fire was becoming still more
diffused. It hovered over the waters, a pale, flickering glow. And
simultaneously the walls of water began to break and come surging
forward.
Jim saw Lucille stretching out her arms toward him, and tried to
struggle forward, but in vain. She cried out his name, and he put all
his strength into that desperate futile struggle to reach her. But he
was being borne backward by the invisible power in the tube. The
rushing torrent was surging about his knees; grew waist deep: in
another moment Jim was swimming for his life against the furious
flood.
Suddenly, however, the tremendous pressure on his chest was relaxed.
Tode had turned the tube away from him. He was leaning forward out of
the boat and grasped old Parrish, who had been flung violently against
it by the dissolving waters.
The same flood carried Jim to the boat's side. Here, however, the
flood was only knee deep, owing to the repulsion still being exercised
by the violet light, which was glimmering feebly. Jim found his feet
and leaped into the craft. He grasped Lucille in his arms.
  *  *  *  *  *
He turned to confront Tode, who had just dragged old Parrish over the
side. The three men confronted one another.
"Turn that tube on me, and I'll jump into your damn machinery and bust
it!" Jim shouted.
An ironical expression came on Tode's face. It was clear that he still
considered himself master of the situation. "At the immediate moment,
Dent, the lives of all of us depend upon your keeping absolutely
still," he answered. "Take my advice and sit down!"
Jim saw Lucille's face, ghastly in the faint violet light that played
about it. The girl had fainted. She was lying unconscious, her feet
against the circular metal plate that protected the machinery, her
head upon the rail that ran around the boat's upper edge. Tode,
without waiting for Jim's answer, stepped over the plate and took his
seat at a sort of instrument board with control levers and thumb
screws that apparently controlled the needles on four dials. He
touched a button, and instantly the violet light disappeared.
With its vanishing, the waves came surging forward, and lapped
violently against the hull, as if about to overwhelm the vessel,
which, however, seemed immovable. It simply rose higher in the water.
Jim understood the cause of this. Those gyroscopes would retain the
hull in the same position against anything but a mechanical force
strong enough to ruin it. He watched Tode as he sat at the instrument
board, which was illuminated by two tiny lights of what looked like
mercury-vapor. His face, handsome and cruel as ever, was tense as he
manipulated the thumb screws. Beside him lay Parrish, faintly
whimpering. The old man had evidently abandoned all hope of effecting
his escape, or of rescuing his daughter.
It was unbearable to have to sit there, knowing that the three of
them were absolutely at Tode's mercy, and yet there was nothing else
to do.
  *  *  *  *  *
Tode looked up with a saturnine smile. "It's a delicate operation to
blur the present without shooting out a hundred years or so in time,"
he said, "but my micrometer's pretty accurate, Dent. Don't move, I
caution you!" He smiled again. "Yes, Dent, time is something like the
fourth dimension of space, as we believed in the old days, and I've
proved it."
Jim saw Tode touch the screw that controlled the fourth dial, and
instantly it was borne in on him that each of the dials controlled one
spatial dimension. This fourth, then, was the time dimension!
Could it be true that Tode had solved the practical problem of
traveling in time, theoretically implied since the discoveries of
Einstein?
He had known in the old days that the Atom Smasher might be adapted to
this purpose, but neither Parrish nor he had dreamed of turning aside
from their endeavor to utilize it for the purpose of releasing atomic
energy.
Thump! Thump! The familiar old sound, rushing back into memory after
all those years, the release of the electrical discharge, echoing
through infinity! The scrub around the pool blurred and was gone. A
vast gray panorama extended itself on either side of them.
They were travelling--in space--and time too. Jim no longer doubted.
And, chilled with horror, he sat there, his arm about Lucille's
unconscious form.
CHAPTER III
_Into the Infinite_
How long he sat there he did not know. Minutes or hours seemed all the
same to him. Nothing but that gray monochrome, of neither light nor
darkness, that endless panorama of miles and years, blended together
into this chaos!
But suddenly there came a shout from Tode. The blur ceased, the lights
flickered. Again there sounded the two thumps of the electrical
discharge. The vibrating mechanism grew steady. Above them, out of the
grayness, a moon disclosed itself, then the pin-points of stars. All
about them was an immense, sandy waste.
"Know where we are, Dent?" came Tode's chuckle.
Jim was not sufficiently master of himself to attempt to answer.
"We are on what will be the Russian steppes some fifty thousand years
ahead of us in time," grinned Tode. "This is an interlude between two
ice ages. Observe how pleasantly warm the climate is, for Russia.
Unfortunately the receding glaciers carried off the top-soil, which
accounts for the barrenness of the district, but in another century
this country will be overgrown with ferns, and inhabited by the
mastodon and wild horse, and a few enterprising palaeolithic hunters,
who will come in to track them down and destroy them with their stone
axes."
  *  *  *  *  *
"I think you're the same sort of damn liar you always were, Tode,"
answered Jim--but without conviction. There was something terrific
about that desolation. Nothing within a thousand miles of Long Island
corresponded to it.
"You'll be convinced pretty quickly, when you see my specimen,"
answered Tode. "I let him off here on the way to the pool. He's not
exactly presentable, and when I got the idea of picking up Lucille and
taking her back with me, I thought it best not to let her see him. He
didn't want to be let off. Was afraid I wouldn't pick him up again,
and I'll admit it was a matter of pretty careful reckoning. But this
is the place, almost to the yard.
"Yes, I've done some close reckoning, Dent, but the cleverest part of
the business was letting old Parrish think he'd got away from me. I
knew he'd telephone Lucille. You know, I always had the brains of the
outfit, Dent," he continued, with a smirk of self-satisfaction.
He looked out of the boat. "And here, if I'm not mistaken, comes my
specimen," he added.
  *  *  *  *  *
Something was running across the steppes toward them. It came nearer,
took human form. It was human! A man--but such a man as Jim had never
seen before outside the covers of a book. And he recognised the race
immediately.
It was a Neanderthal man, one of the race that co-existed with the
highly developed Cro-Magnons some thirty thousand years ago. Man and
not ape, though the face was bestial, and there were huge ridges above
the eyebrows.
And if Jim had needed conviction, the sight of this gibbering
creature, now climbing into the boat and fawning upon Tode, convinced
him. For the Neanderthal man vanished from the scene long before the
beginning of recorded history.
For a few moments a deathly faintness overcame him ... his eyes
closed, he felt unconsciousness rushing in upon him like a black
cloud.
"It's all right, Dent--don't look so scared!" came Tode's mocking
voice.
Jim opened his eyes, shook off that cloud of darkness with an immense
effort. The boat was throbbing violently as the wheels gyrated, the
violet light had become a pillar as thick as a man, and shot straight
up to a height of fifty feet, before it rolled away. Lucille was lying
where she had been, her eyes still staring up unseeing at the stars.
Old Parrish was whining and whimpering as he crouched in his place.
And at Tode's feet crouched the Neanderthal man, repulsive, bestial,
even though hardly formidable, and filling the last vacant spot inside
the boat. He was gibbering and mouthing as he fawned upon Tode and
pressed his hand to his hairy face. He continued to crouch and looked
up at his master with doglike eyes.
  *  *  *  *  *
Repulsive, and yet man, not ape. Distinctly human, perhaps a little
lower than the Australian aborigine, the Neanderthal showed by his
reverence that the human faculty of worship existed in him.
"Meet Cain, one of my Drilgoes," said Tode, with a grin. "A faithful
servant. I left him here to wait for me on the return journey. Cain's
just my pet name for him because he subsists on the fruits of the
earth, don't you, Cain?"
The Drilgo grunted, and pressed Tode's hand to his repulsive lips,
which were fringed with a reddish beard. Suddenly Tode began to laugh
uproariously. "Feel anything wrong with your head, Dent?" he asked.
Dent put up his hand and pulled away a quantity of charred hair. His
forehead began to itch, and, rubbing his finger across it, he realized
that his eyebrows were gone. Tode laughed still louder.
"You've kept your teeth by about two seconds' grace, Dent, but I
shouldn't be surprised if you needed dental attention shortly," he
said. "What a pity dentists won't be invented for another forty or
fifty thousand years."
"You're a devil!" cried Jim.
"You see, the human body is very resistant to the Ray," Tode went on.
"It almost seems as if there is an organizing principle within it.
Even the animal tissues are resistant, though not to the same extent
as the human ones. It takes about twenty seconds for the organized
human form to be disintegrated. But hair and beaks and claws, being
superficial matter, vanish almost as soon as the Ray is turned on
them. Ten seconds more, and you'd have been obliterated, Dent, just as
your plane was.
"Yes, rub your head. Your hair will probably grow again--if I decide
to let you live. It rather depends upon what impression you make upon
Lucille as a bald-headed hero. After all, I didn't invite you to
accompany us. It's your own lookout."
  *  *  *  *  *
Jim could find nothing to say to that. He was discovering more and
more that they were all helpless in Tode's hands.
"Sit back!" snarled Tode suddenly. He gave the Drilgo a push that sent
him sprawling into the bottom of the boat. "Dent, your life depends
upon your absolute acquiescence to my proposals. I didn't like you
particularly in the old days, any more than you liked me. I thought
you were a fool. On the other hand, I've no active reason to hate you,
at present. It may be that I can use you.
"Meanwhile we've got a longish journey before us, ten thousand years
more, multiplied by the fourth power of two thousand miles. Seems
simple? Well, I had to invent the mathematical process for it. Reckon
in the gravitational attraction of the planets, and you'll begin to
get an idea of the complexity of it. So, in vulgar parlance, we're not
likely to arrive till morning."
He glanced at Lucille, who was still lying unconscious with Jim's arm
about her. Then his eyes rose to meet Jim's, and a sneering smile
played about his lips. That smile was the acknowledgment of their
rivalry for the girl's affections. And it was more--it was a
challenge.
Tode welcomed that rivalry because, Jim could see, he meant to keep
him alive under conditions of servitude, to demonstrate to Lucille his
superiority.
Tode turned his thumbscrews, and the two thuds resounded. The violet
column sank down, the boat vibrated, the level stretch of land became
a blur again. The moon and stars vanished. Once more the four were off
on that terrific journey.
  *  *  *  *  *
At first they seemed to be traversing space that was shot through by
alternate light and darkness, so that at times Jim could see the other
occupants of the boat clearly, while at other times there was only
Tode visible at the instrument board, with the dark outlines of the
Drilgo, Cain, sprawled at his feet. But soon these streaks seemed to
come closer and closer together, until the duration of each was only a
fraction of a second. And closer, until light and darkness blended
into a universal gray. These, Jim knew, were the alternations of night
and day.
They were traveling--incredible as it was--in time as well as space,
though whether backward or forward Jim could not know. From the
presence of the Neanderthal man, however, Jim was convinced that Tode
was taking them back more thousands of years, into the beginnings of
humanity.
A fearful journey! A madder journey than Jim could have conceived of,
had he not been a participant in it. He was losing all sense of
reality. He was hardly convinced that he would not awaken in New York,
to discover that the whole episode had been a dream.
Was this Lucille, the girl he loved ... with whom he had dined in New
York only a day or two before ... this unconscious form, stretched out
on the deck of the weird ship that was rushing through eternity? Or,
rather, it was they who were rushing through space and time upon a
stationary ship! What was reality, and what was dream, then?
Tode called "Come over here, Dent! I want to talk to you!"
  *  *  *  *  *
Jim picked his way over the metal floor of the round boat, came up to
Tode, and sat down beside him above the sprawling form of the Drilgo,
Cain.
"You were a fool to come here, Dent." Tode turned with a malicious
smile from his seat at the instrument board. "You didn't have to come.
I take it that you are in love with Lucille, you poor imbecile, and
still cherish dreams of winning her. We'll take up that matter in due
course.
"Do you think I've been idle during these five years of my exile? I've
been too busy even to come back for the woman I was in love with. And
do you know what I've been doing during all this hellish period?
Charting courses, Dent! Mapping out all the planetary movements back
for uncounted ages--roughly, crudely, of course, but the best I was
able to. These are difficult seas to navigate, though they may not
seem so. You fool," he added savagely, "why didn't you come in with me
in the old days? I told you that the Atom Smasher could be used to
travel through time, and you mocked at me as a dreamer.
"I chose my hour. When everything was ready, I set forth on the most
desperate journey ever attempted by man. Talk of Columbus!--he had
nothing on me. I tell you, Dent, I've been back to the Archaean Age,
back to the time when nothing but crawling worms moved on the face of
the earth. And I've been forward to the time when an errant planet
will disrupt the earth into a shower of lava--and I nearly wrecked the
boat. Dent.
"I've won, Dent! I've won! I've solved the problem that gives man
immortality! All the epochs that have existed since God first formed
the world are mine to play with! I have seen myself as a puling
infant, and as a greybeard. I have made myself immortal, because, with
this machine, I can set back the clock of time. I have found a land
where I am worshipped as a god."
  *  *  *  *  *
Tode's eyes glittered with maniacal fires. He went on in a voice of
indescribable triumph:
"I'm a god there, Dent. Do you want to know where that land is? It is
Atlantis, sunk beneath the waves nine thousand years before recorded
history opened. It is Atlantis, from which the Cro-Magnons fled in
their ships, to land on the coasts of Spain and France, and become the
ancestors of modern man.
"In old Atlantis, still not wholly submerged, I have made myself a
god. I have mastered the savage Drilgoes whom the Atlanteans
oppressed. All the spoils of their ruined cities are at my disposal.
And I came back to get Lucille, whom I had never ceased to love.
Together Lucille and I will rule like god and goddess.
"Join me, Dent. I'm a god in Atlantis--a god, I tell you. The lesser
races fear me as a supernatural being. Only the city remains
uncaptured, but it is mine whenever I choose to take it. A god--a
god--a god!"
Jim saw now what he had not realized before, that Tode was insane. It
would, indeed, have been a miracle if he had been able to retain his
sanity under such circumstances as he had described. His voice rose
into a wild scream. Yes, Tode was mad--just such a madman as any of
the old Roman emperors, drunk with power, each in his turn the sole
ruler of the world.
"The Earth is mine!" Tode screamed. "Before the modern world was
dreamed of, before the nations were created, Atlantis was the sole
power that held dominion over the scattered tribes of mankind. And she
is in my hand whenever I strike.
"Wealth incalculable, treasures such as man has never since seen,
marvels of scientific discovery, flying machines that would make ours
look foolish, paintings grander than have since been executed--all
these things exist in the proud city that will shortly be at my
command. And I have my Drilgoes, the inferior race, to serve me. They
worship me because they know I am a god. Join me, Dent, and taste the
joys of being one of the supreme rulers of the world."
  *  *  *  *  *
In spite of his undoubted madness, there was such power in Tode's
voice that Jim could not help believe what he had said.
"Well," snarled Tode. "You hesitate to give me your answer, Dent?"
"Lucille and I are engaged to be married," answered Jim, and the words
were drawn from his lips almost against his will. "We love each other.
I am not going to lie to you and then betray you, Tode."
The expression on Tode's face was demoniacal. He snatched up the
deadly tube that contained the violet fire and turned it upon Jim.
Again Jim felt that repulsive force pushing him back. He gasped for
breath, and tensed his whole body in supreme resistance, while he
tried to grapple with Tode in vain.
But suddenly Tode dropped the tube, and a roar of laughter broke from
his lips.
"You fool!" he shouted. "I tell you I am a god, the one god, supreme
above all. Do you think to match your puny will against my own? I tell
you Lucille is mine. And for ever, Dent. Whenever we two have reached
old age, all that will be necessary for us to do will be to turn this
screw a hair's breadth back into the past, and we are both young
again. By holding this vessel steady in four-dimensional space, I can
achieve immortality."
"Yes, Tode," answered Jim, "but, you see, that's the one thing that
you haven't been able to work out yet."
The words seemed to come automatically from Jim's lips. It was only
after he had spoken them that he realized they were true. For a moment
Tode glared at him; then suddenly, with a shriek of insane rage, he
leaped from the instrument board and swung the ray tube with all his
might.
Jim felt the blow descend with stunning force upon his head. He
reeled, flung out his arms, and toppled forward, unconscious....
CHAPTER IV
_Escape_
An intolerably bright light that seemed to sear his eyeballs was the
first thing of which Jim was conscious. Then he became aware of his
aching head, of a sense of utter lassitude, as if he had been bruised
all over in some machine that had caught him up and held him in its
grip for endless aeons.
At last, despite the pain in his eyes, he managed to get his eyelids
open. He tried to struggle to his feet, only to discover that he was
firmly bound with what appeared to be tough creepers, pliant as ropes.
After the lapse of a few minutes, during which he struggled with the
receding waves of unconsciousness, he came to a realization of his
surroundings. That light that had so distressed him--though the
effects were now beginning to pass off--was a pillar of smoke and
flame, shooting out of the crater of a volcano about a mile away,
across a valley.
He was lying in the entrance to a cave, pegged out on his back, and
bound by the tough creepers to the stakes driven into the ground. Up
to the mouth of the cave grew huge tree-ferns, cattails, cycads, and
such growths as existed in earlier ages in the warm, moist regions of
the world.
Beneath the level of the cave a heavy white fog completely shrouded
the valley, extending up to within a short distance of the volcano
opposite. But on the upper slopes of the volcano the sunlight played,
making its crater a sheen of glassy lava, intolerably bright.
Beyond the volcano Jim could see what looked like an expanse of ocean.
  *  *  *  *  *
He groaned, and at the sound a creature came shambling forward,
carrying what looked like a huge melon in either hand. Jim recognized
the Drilgo, Cain.
Chattering and mumbling, Cain placed one of the fruits to Jim's mouth.
It was a sort of bread-fruit, but he was too nauseated to eat, and
rejected it with disgust. Cain offered him the second fruit.
It was a hollow gourd, the interior filled with a clear fluid. Jim
drank greedily as the Drilgo put it to his lips. The contents were
like water, but slightly acid. Jim felt refreshed. He looked about
him.
The Drilgo uttered a chattering call, and immediately a host of the
savages swarmed into the cave. Men--undoubtedly men, in spite of the
brow ridges and the receding foreheads, carrying long spears,
consisting of chipped and pointed heads of stone, with holes bored in
them, through which long bands of creepers passed, fastening them
firmly to the shaft.
Chattering and gesticulating, the Drilgoes surrounded Jim as he lay
helpless on the ground. Their savage faces, their rolling eyes, the
threatening gestures that they made with their spears, convinced Jim
that his end was a foregone conclusion.
But suddenly a distant rumbling sound was heard, increasing rapidly in
volume. The floor of the cave vibrated; masses of rock dropped from
the walls. The light of the volcano across the valley was suddenly
obscured in an immense cloud of black smoke. The twilight within the
cave was succeeded by almost impenetrable darkness.
Shrieking in terror, the Drilgoes bolted, while Jim lay straining at
his ropes, expecting each moment to be crushed by the masses of rock
that were falling all about him.
Suddenly a soft whisper came to Jim through the darkness: "Jim! Are
you safe! Where are you? I can't see you! Speak to me!"
It was Lucille's voice, and Jim called back, husky and tremulous in
the sheer joy that had succeeded his anticipation of instant death.
  *  *  *  *  *
Then he felt the girl kneeling at his side, and heard her hacking at
his bonds. A whole minute passed before the stone knife was able to
sever the last of the stout withes, however.
Then Jim was swaying on his feet, and Lucille's arms were about him,
and for a few moments their fears were forgotten in the renewal of
their love.
"I heard what that devil said to you last night," the girl said. "He
means to kill you with awful tortures. He is away now, on some task or
other, but he'll be back at any moment. We must get away at once--we
three. Dad's in another cave not far away, and his guards bolted after
the earthquake."
The earth was still rumbling, and the cavern still vibrating, but it
was clear that there was no time to lose. As soon as the quake
subsided the Drilgoes would return. Guided by Lucille, Jim groped his
way through the cavern. The girl called softly at intervals, and
presently Jim heard old Parrish's answering call. Then the old man's
form appeared in silhouette against the dark.
"I've got Jim," Lucille whispered. "Are you ready, dad?"
"Yes, yes, I'm ready," chattered the old man. "Now's our chance. I
know a place where we can hide in the thick forests, where the Ray of
the Atlanteans cannot penetrate the mists. Let's go! Let's go!"
Gripping hands, the three started back toward the point where a faint
patch of darkness showed out the entrance to the cavern. They were
nearing it when another and more violent shock flung them upon their
faces.
Huge masses of rock came hurtling down from the roof and sides of the
cavern, and again the three seemed to escape by a miracle.
  *  *  *  *  *
Suddenly a huge shaft of fire shot from the crater opposite, evolving
into an inverted cone that made the whole land dazzlingly bright. It
pierced the mists in the valley underneath, and by that light Jim
could see a great wave of lava streaming down the mountain sides, like
soup spilled out of a bowl.
A gush of black smoke followed, and the light went out.
"Now!" gasped Parrish, and, clinging to one another, the three darted
out of the cavern's entrance. Another terrific shock sent them
stumbling and reeling and sprawling down the side of the mountain. Jim
heard old Parrish wailing, and, as the shock subsided, groped his way
to his side.
"You hurt?" he shouted.
"Lucille, Lucille," moaned the old man. "She's dead! A big rock
crushed her. I wish I was dead too."
Jim called Lucille's name frantically, and to his immense relief
heard her crying faintly out of the darkness. He rushed to her side
and held her in his arms.
"Where are you hit, darling?"
"I'm--all right," she panted. "I was stunned for a moment. I--can--go
on now."
But she went limp in Jim's arms, and Jim picked her up and stood
irresolute, until he heard Parrish shambling toward him over the
heaving ground.
"She's not hurt, I think, only fainted," said Jim. "Which way,
Parrish? You lead us."
"Down the slope," panted Parrish. "We'll be in the ferns in a minute.
We can hide there for a while, till she's able to walk. God help us
all! And I was once Professor of Physical Chemistry at Columbia!"
The outcry might have seemed comical under other circumstances; as it
was, Jim heartily re-echoed old Parrish's sentiments in his heart.
The last shock was subsiding in faint earth tremors. The two men
plunged down into the heavy fog, which quickly covered them, Jim
carrying Lucille in his arms. He felt the ferny undergrowth all about
him, the thick boles of tree-ferns emerged out of the mist.
"We can stop here for a while," panted Parrish. "Crouch down! They'll
never find us in this fog, and in a few minutes, when Lucille's
better, we can go on."
  *  *  *  *  *
"You must tell me where we are and what our chances are," said Jim,
after again ascertaining that Lucille was unharmed.
"I'll tell you, Dent, as quick as I can. It's the place where I've
spent five years of hell as the slave of that devil, Tode. I never
dreamed, when we were working on the old Atom Smasher, that he had
adapted it to travel in the fourth dimension. He's taken us back
twelve thousand years or so to the island of Atlantis. History hasn't
begun yet. Atlantis is the only civilization in the world. The rest
are Drilgoes, Neanderthal men, wandering in the forests, and still in
their stone age.
"It's true, Dent, what old Plato learned from the Egyptian priests.
Atlantis has been slowly sinking for thousands of years, and all
that's left now is the one great island that we're on. Nearly all the
Atlanteans, the Cro-Magnon men, have perished, except for a few who
have crossed in ships to the coasts of France and Spain. They'll be
the founders of modern Europe--Basques and Iberians, and Bretons and
Welshmen. Our ancestors! It makes my brain reel to think of it!"
"Go on! Go on!" said Jim.
"There's a great city on the island, known as Atlantis too. As big as
London or New York. With flying-machines and temples and art galleries
and big ships that they're building to carry them away when the next
subsidence comes. They know they're doomed, for every few days there's
an eruption now.
"Tode means to make himself master of Atlantis, and transport it into
another epoch by means of the Atom Smasher. But he's never managed to
enter. He's made himself a god in the eyes of the Drilgoes, the
savages who inhabit these forests. He's planning to lead them against
the city, and he's got an army of thousands from all parts of the
interior, who worship him as divine.
  *  *  *  *  *
"The Atlanteans are unwarlike. They've forgotten how to fight in their
thousands of years of peace. But they've got a Ray ten times as strong
as Tode's, that brings instant death to everything it touches. It
shrivels it up. It's a different principle. I don't understand it, but
it's this Ray that keeps the Drilgoes from capturing the city.
"Tode's got a laboratory inside the cave, fitted up with apparatus
that he brought from Chicago, the world capital of the year 3000 A.
D., after disintegrating the atoms and recombining them. But he hasn't
succeeded altogether. He hasn't learned everything. The future isn't
quite clear, like the past. There's a dark cloud moves across the
spectral lines and blurs them. I think it's the element of free
will--or God!"
"I know," Jim answered. "He can't hold that boat steady in
four-dimensional space, as he pretends he can. If he could, it would
mean that man was wholly master of his destiny. He can't and he never
will.
"There's an unknown quantity comes in, Parrish. It is God, and that's
what's going to beat him in the end."
"I've not been as idle as Tode thinks," said Parrish, with a senile
leer. "I know more about the Atom Smasher than he dreams of. He thinks
me just an old fool, the remnants of whose brains are useful to him in
his laboratory. That's why he's kept me alive so far. He'll find out
his mistake," he chuckled. "I have something Tode doesn't dream of."
Suddenly Parrish's air of intense seriousness vanished. He chuckled
and fumbled in his rags. Jim felt a small object like a lever pressed
into his hand and then withdrawn.
"It's death, Dent," chuckled old Parrish. "The concentrated essence of
the destructive principle. It's a lever I fitted into a concealed
groove in the Atom Smasher unknown to Tode. This lever has a universal
joint and connects with a hidden chamber, and when pulled will
catapult the annihilated components of a small quantity of uranium in
any direction we desire. The release of the slumbering energy of this
uranium will produce an explosion of proportions beyond the wildest
dreams of engineers--perhaps, one great enough to throw the Earth out
of its orbit!"
"Uranium!... Breaking up its components!" gasped Jim. "You mean you
can actually do that?"
"Yes!" chuckled Parrish. "I'm keeping it for the day when Tode becomes
a god. When he's steadied the boat in time-space and halted the march
of the past, and when he's got Lucille--then, Dent, I shall so pull
the lever that it will release the energy straight at Tode--and
destroy the Atom-Smasher, ourselves, and even, perhaps, the whole
Earth!"
And he burst into a peal of such wild laughter that Jim realized the
old man's wits were gone.
  *  *  *  *  *
Was it true, that amazing story? It was difficult to know, and yet
anything seemed possible in this amazing world into which Jim had
suddenly been thrown.
The vast pall of smoke cast out by the volcano was beginning to
subside. Slowly a spectral light began to filter through the valley.
Through the fog Jim could see glimpses of the ferny undergrowth, the
giant tree-ferns and cycads that towered aloft. It was like a picture
of the earth when the mastodons, the grass-eaters and the meat-eaters
disputed for its supremacy.
Jim bent over Lucille. He saw her stir, he heard her murmur his name.
Suddenly she sat up, fixed her eyes on his, and shuddered.
"I'm all right, Jim. Let's go," she said. "I can walk now."
She staggered to her feet. Jim put out his hand to support her, but
she shook her head. Jim touched old Parrish on the arm. He started and
uttered a wild screech; then seemed to come to himself and rose.
But that screech of his was re-echoed from the mountainside above.
Other voices took up the echoes. Lucille clutched at Jim in a frenzy
of fear.
"The Drilgoes!" she whispered. "They're on our trail!"
Seizing old Parrish by the arm, Jim started to drag him into the
recesses of the fern forest. Suddenly the bestial face of a Drilgo
appeared.
A yell broke from the man's throat. The hairy arm shot back. Jim saw
the stone tip of the long spear poised overhead. He leaped forward,
delivering a blow in the man's midriff with all the strength of his
right arm.
  *  *  *  *  *
The Drilgo grunted and doubled forward, the spear falling from his
hand. The heavy head of stone embedded itself in the soft ground, so
that the spear remained upright. As the man collapsed he yelled at the
top of his voice.
"This way! This way!" gibbered old Parrish, suddenly alert.
But now the undergrowth all about them was alive with Drilgoes. The
three dodged and doubled like hunted hares. High overhead something
began to clack with a sound like that made by a woodpecker drilling a
tree, but infinitely louder.
And out of the void above came Tode's voice, shouting commands to the
Drilgoes in their own language.
Suddenly a column of fire shot up from the volcano, infusing the white
mists with a reddish glare. Overhead the three could see Tode. He was
flying with a pair of mechanical wings strapped to his shoulders, not
more than two hundred feet above them. With a shout of triumph he
swooped down. In his hand was a small cylinder, about the mouth of
which a phosphorescent violet light was beginning to play.
"I've got you, Dent," he screamed in triumph, hovering above the
three, while the wings drummed and vibrated till they seemed the mere
play of light and shadow about Tode's shoulders. "Halt, or I'll blast
your body and soul to hell! Halt, or I'll kill _her_!"
The deadly tube was pointing steadily at Lucille's body as Tode
hovered ten feet overhead, perfectly still save for the whirring
wings. The three stopped dead, and Tode, with a shout of triumph,
began calling the Drilgoes, who swarmed forward out of the
undergrowth.
Huge brown bodies, nude save for their skins of jungle-cat or serpent,
they emerged, quickly forming a ring about the three prisoners. Tode
fluttered to the ground.
"Fools, did you think you could escape that way?" he asked. "As for you,
Dent. I'm going to convince you of the reality of four-dimensional space
as you would not be convinced in the old days. Do you know what I'm going
to do with you? I'm going to strip the skin from you with the ray, and
take you into the anatomical room at Columbia University and leave you
there as an exhibit, Dent!"
Tode grinned like a madman. But Jim was looking past him, at something
that had suddenly appeared upon the far horizon.
  *  *  *  *  *
It was a round disc of bluish white, a disc like the moon, but
slightly smaller, a disc that flickered as if it had an eyelid that
was being winked repeatedly. Simultaneously screams broke from the
throats of all the Drilgoes. They stampeded.
Tode whirled about and saw. With a curse he leaped into the air and
whirred away.
Out of that disc a slender, blue-white beam shot suddenly, driving a
pathway through the fog, and disclosing the dark depths of the valley.
"The Eye! The Eye!" screeched Parrish. "Down on the ground! Down!
Down!"
He dropped, and Jim caught Lucille and flung himself headlong with
her. To and fro overhead, but only a few feet above them, moved the
searchlight. Shrieks broke from the Drilgoes' throats as they
scattered through the jungle.
Everywhere that ray moved, trees and undergrowth simply disappeared. A
bunch of Drilgoes, caught by it, were obliterated in an instant. Great
gaps were left through the undergrowth as the ray passed.
It faded as quickly as it had come, and instantly old Parrish was on
his feet, dragging at his daughter.
"Now! Now!" he babbled, heading along one of the burned tracks through
the undergrowth.
Jim seized Lucille and the two raced in the wake of old Parrish.
Behind them they could hear the Drilgoes shouting, but a dense,
impenetrable darkness was already beginning to settle down over the
valley. They lost the track and went crashing through the ferns, on
and on until all was silence about them.
Suddenly Parrish went down like a log. He lay breathing heavily,
completely exhausted. When Jim spoke to him a feeble muttering was the
only answer. Jim and Lucille dropped to the ground exhausted beside
him.
CHAPTER V
_The Eye of Atlantis_
For perhaps half an hour the three lay there, hearing nothing. It
seemed to be night, for the darkness was impenetrable, save for the
lurid flashes of fire from the volcano. Parrish, who was slowly
recovering his strength, was mumbling incessantly. It was with
difficulty that Jim recalled him to a realization of his surroundings.
"Where is the city of Atlantis?" he asked him.
"Over there," mumbled Parrish. "Behind the volcano. Why do you ask
me?"
"I'm thinking of going there."
"Eh? Going there? You're mad. The Eye will see you, the Eye that can
see for a hundred miles. They'll turn the Ray on you. Nothing is too
small for the Eye. And they watch night and day."
"The Eye is off now."
"It's never off. The Eye is dark. It grows white only when they are
about to use the Ray. Perhaps the Eye is watching us now."
"Nevertheless," said Jim, "I think we would do well to try to enter
the city. We can't live here in the jungle at the mercy of these
Drilgoes."
"It is impossible to enter. All strangers are killed by the
Atlanteans."
"Dad," interposed Lucille, "I think we'd better do what Jim suggests.
One of us must decide."
"My idea is that you take us to some place where we can get a view of
the city," said Jim. "Then we can make up our minds what to do. We've
got to get somewhere out of this jungle."
  *  *  *  *  *
Parrish rose to his feet, mumbling. "If we go round the base of the
volcano we can see Atlantis," he said. "It's always light there. In
the daytime they drive away the fogs by some means they've got, and at
night they have an artificial sun. But we'll be killed, we'll all be
killed."
Mumbling and muttering, he began groping his way through the
undergrowth in the direction of the volcano, whose flashes were again
becoming more frequent, affording a means of directing their route.
Obscure rumblings were again beginning to shake the earth. For an hour
the three picked their way steadily upward through the ferns, until
the ground became more open.
They were approaching the base of the volcano, whose side now towered
above them, the upper part glassy with vitreous lava.
Suddenly Parrish, who was still leading, stopped and began to tremble
with fear. Stepping to his side, Jim heard the low muttering of voices
not far away.
Very cautiously he moved forward through the thin fern scrub, until
the glow of burning embers caught his sight. He stopped, hearing the
voices more distinctly, and again moved forward.
Three Drilgoes, huge, bestial men, and evidently an outpost, were
squatting around the ashes, devouring something with noisy gusto.
Softly as Jim had moved, their acute ears had caught the sound of his
footsteps. They rose, still holding what they were eating in their
hands, and, grasping their stone spears, moved in three separate ways
toward the edge of the clearing.
The man nearest Jim uttered a guttural exclamation and, after sniffing
a moment, began to lope in his direction. Suddenly he stopped short,
petrified with astonishment and fear at the sight of a man who,
instinct told him, was neither Atlantean nor of his own kind.
  *  *  *  *  *
Jim leaped, tackling him about the knees, and brought him heavily to
the ground. As the Drilgo fell, the spear clattered from his hand, but
from his snakeskin girdle he pulled a long, curved knife of chipped
obsidian, sharp as a razor.
Jim grasped the Drilgo's wrist, but in a moment he saw that he was no
match for the creature in strength. He drew back his right arm and
delivered a punch to the solar plexus with all his strength.
As the Drilgo's hand grew limp he snatched away the knife. There was
no helping what he did for the two others were close upon him.
A thrust, a slashing blow, and the Drilgo was weltering in his
life-blood. A backward leap, and Jim evaded the flung spear by a
hair's breadth.
Knife in hand he leaped forward, and, dodging in beneath the long
shaft of the weapon, got in a slash that almost cut the Drilgo's body
in two.
The third Drilgo, seeing his two companions in their death-throes,
flung away his spear and fled with loud howls into the jungle.
Jim stepped back. Lucille and her father were already almost at his
heels. "It's all right," he called. "Come this way!" He led them
through the ferny growth in such a manner that they should not see the
two dead bodies. Nevertheless, he felt that Lucille knew.
"Let's see what they were cooking," he said.
But again he turned quickly. He could not know for sure what flesh
that was, roasting and scorching on the embers, and he had no desire
to know. It might have been monkey, but ... he turned away, and as he
did so, Parrish picked up several round objects that were lying a
little distance away.
"These are good to eat," he said. "A sort of bread-fruit. I've lived
on it for five years," he added with a sort of grotesque pathos.
They munched the fruit as they proceeded up the mountain, and found it
satisfying. Parrish seemed more himself again, though he still
muttered at intervals. Lucille clung closely to Jim as they proceeded.
  *  *  *  *  *
They were treading on lava now, vitreous, and smooth as glass. It was
impossible to proceed further in that direction. They turned their
steps around the base in the direction of the sea.
After another hour, during which their way was lit by almost
continuous lurid flashes from the crater, a patch of illumination,
apparently out at sea, began to become visible. A half hour more, and
they were rounding the volcano's base, and suddenly it burst upon
them, a stupendous spectacle that drew an exclamation of amazement
from Jim's lips.
That low, flat background was the sea, the sound of whose breakers was
faintly audible. Between sea and land ran a narrow, slender causeway,
perhaps a mile in length. And beyond that, set on a small island, was
the most splendid city that Jim could have imagined.
Like New York--very like New York, with its mighty towers, but more
symmetrical, sloping upward from the sea toward a towering rampart at
the heart of it, crowned with huge domes and minarets and serpentine
ramps and mighty blocks of stone that must have sheltered as many
occupants as New York's highest skyscrapers.
The whole was snow-white, and gleamed softly in an artificial light
dispensed from an enormous artificial planet that seemed to hover
above the ramparts.
"God!" whispered Jim in awe as he gazed at the great city.
"You cannot cross that causeway," whimpered old Parrish. "It's death
to try. One sweep of the Ray will blot out every living thing."
"Hush! Listen!" came from Lucille's lips. "Something's moving down
there!"
  *  *  *  *  *
The distant murmur of voices, the indescribable "feel" of the
proximity of other human beings told Jim that they were in imminent
danger. He glanced about him. A little overhead was an outcrop of
enormous boulders, standing up like a little fortress above the smooth
lava.
"Get behind there!" Jim whispered.
They turned and ran, slipping and stumbling up the smooth slope.
Reaching the boulders, they ensconced themselves hastily behind them.
Jim peered out through a crevice between two of the largest stones.
The sound of moving things became more audible.
Then, as a flash of flame shot from the crater overhead, Jim saw a
black human horde creeping like an array of ants around the base of
the mountain not far beneath.
Just like an army of warrior ants it seemed to flow onward, in perfect
order. And in the midst of it a faint violet light began to be
visible.
Parrish seized Jim's arm, shaking with terror. "You know what that is,
Dent?" he whimpered.
"It's Tode's Drilgoes, moving for a night attack upon Atlantis,"
answered Jim. "And that thing in the middle is the Atom Smasher."
  *  *  *  *  *
It seemed hours before the last of the serried ranks of Drilgoes had
passed. By the light of a lurid flash from the volcano Jim could see
the column winding toward the causeway. Then all was shrouded in
impenetrable darkness, save for the snow-soft city upon the island.
"What are we going to do?" chattered old Parrish. "I wish I was back
in Tode's cave. He gave me food and let me help with his work
sometimes. I'll die here. We'll never get away. We'll never get
anywhere."
"We're safer here than anywhere else," answered Jim. "We'll have to
stay till morning, or--God, look at that!"
Out of the ramparts of the city the round, blue-white disc of the Eye
had suddenly disclosed itself. And simultaneously a violet flare shot
up above the moving hosts of the Drilgoes in the middle of the
causeway.
Out of the center of the Eye that blinding searchlight streamed. And
the pillar of violet fire rose up to counter it, clove it in two, as a
man cuts off the tentacle of a cuttlefish, and left it groping
helplessly above the heads of the Drilgoes.
  *  *  *  *  *
To and fro wavered the blue-white beam, and like a protective wall the
violet column spread and extended, till the air was interlaced with
the play of the two colors. Streaks of white shot through streaks of
purple and black neutral clouds twirled, swirling in ghostlike forms.
It was a scene inconceivably beautiful, and it was impossible to
realize what must be happening out there.
Men must be dying, withering like stubble in the blue-white flames,
whenever they caught them. And yet, under that play of colors, Jim
could see the vast host crawling forward to the assault.
  *  *  *  *  *
He held his breath. It was sublime and terrible, and on the result of
that conflict depended--what? What difference, when all this was
forgotten history, antedating the written records of the human race?
Then of a sudden the blue-white rays were seen to win. They were
beating down the violet light. Like living fingers they pierced that
protective wall, flinging it back, until only the tall central pillar
remained. And then for the first time the sound of combat became
audible.
A groan of despair, of defeat, of hopelessness. The black stream was
recoiling, turning upon itself. In the vivid glare of the white light
it could be seen dissolving, breaking into a thousand pieces,
streaming back toward the land. And, as it broke, the blue-white light
pursued, eating its way and blasting all it met. Atlantis had
triumphed.
Another sound was audible. From the city it came, a whirring as of
innumerable grasshoppers, increasing till it sounded once more like
the tapping of innumerable woodpeckers. Suddenly the night broke into
whirling balls of fire.
Lucille cried out. Jim leaped to his feet to see more clearly.
"It's men with wings," he cried. "Scores of them. They're hurling
something at the Drilgoes!"
  *  *  *  *  *
The clacking of the wing mechanism filled the air. Now the fugitives
from the Drilgo host were streaming along the base of the mountain
underneath, seeking the safety of the jungles, and over them, riding
them, harrying them, flew the Atlantean birdmen, hurling their fiery
balls. And where the balls fell, conflagrations of cold fire seemed to
start and run like mercury, and shrivel up everything they touched.
But the birdmen were not without casualties of their own. Here and
there one could be seen to drop, and then the massed Drilgoes would
turn savagely upon him with their stone-pointed spears. The fight was
coming very close now. The savage cries of the Drilgoes filled the
night.
A ball of fire broke hardly fifty yards away from where the three were
crouching. A birdman fluttered down like a wounded hawk and lay
a-sprawl just underneath the rampart of boulders. Jim surmounted them,
ran down the slope of the mountainside, and bent over the dying man.
He was hideously wounded by the thrust of a Drilgo spear--whether
because the mechanism had failed, or because he had swooped too low,
Jim could not determine. As Jim bent over him he looked up at him.
A youth in his teens, with the face and build of a Greek warrior, a
worthy ancestor of European man. Jim looked at him and shuddered. "My
grandfather four hundred generations removed," he thought.
Seeing that this was no Drilgo, with eyes widened by the anticipation
of death, the Atlantean smiled, and died.
Jim detached the straps that held the wings to his shoulders and
examined them. They were multi-hinged, built of innumerable layers of
laminated wood, which seemed to have been subjected to some special
treatment. In the base of each, just where it fitted to the curve of
the shoulder-blade, a tiny light was burning.
  *  *  *  *  *
Jim looped the straps about his arms and walked back to the rampart.
Old Parrish saw him and screamed. Lucille cried out.
"I'm going to try to get the Atom Smasher," said Jim, pointing to the
thin spire of violet flame that was still visible in the center of the
causeway. "It's our only chance. You must stay here. If I live, I'll
return. If I don't return--"
But he knew that he must return. Nothing could kill him, because
Lucille would be waiting for him behind that rampart of stones upon
the bare, vitreous mountainside.
"I'm going to get the Atom Smasher," Jim repeated. "In these wings
I'll be taken for Atlantean. I'll--bring it back." He spoke with
faltering conviction. And yet there was nothing else to do. Everything
depended upon his being able to bring back the Atom Smasher and take
Lucille and her father away.
"I think you're right, Jim," answered Lucille. "We'll--wait here till
you--come--back."
Her voice died away in a sob. Jim bent and kissed her. Then he began
examining the mechanism of the wings. It did not appear difficult. A
leather strap fastened around the body. Through this strap ran cords
operated by levers upon the breast, and there was a knob in a groove
that looked as if it controlled the starting of the mechanism.
"I'll be back," said Jim.
And suddenly the Eye appeared again, and with it there sounded once
more the whir of wings.
"Down!" shouted Jim.
  *  *  *  *  *
He was too late. A score of birdmen shot out of the dark and hovered
over them. Next moment they had descended to the ground. Lucille and
Parrish were seized, and Jim, struggling furiously, quickly found
himself equally helpless in their grasp.
The accents of the Atlanteans as they spoke to one another were soft
and liquid, their faces were refined and gentle, but their strength
was that of athletes. Jim saw Lucille and Parrish lifted into the air;
next moment he himself was raised in the arms of one of the birdmen,
who shot upward like an arrow and headed a course back toward the
city, carrying Jim as if he had been as light as a child.
CHAPTER VI
_Human Sacrifice_
In a great open space, flanked by temples and colonnades, the flight
had come to rest. There, under the soft artificial light that made the
whole city as bright as day, Jim, Lucille, and her father were set
down before a sort of rostrum, on which were gathered the dignitaries
of the city.
Jim's hopes were rising fast, for between the Atlanteans and the
savage Drilgoes there was as much difference as between a modern
American and a blackfellow from the Australian bush. These men were
civilized to a degree that even modern America has not attained.
Nowhere was there a speck of dirt to be seen. Vehicles moved
soundlessly along the wide streets on either side of this central
meeting-place, and the whole city was roofed with glass, through which
could be seen the brilliant moon and stars--invisible from the
mist-filled valley without.
  *  *  *  *  *
Soft garments of white wool clothed men and women alike, fashioned
something like togas, but cut short at the knee, leaving the lower
part of the leg bare and disclosing the sandaled feet. The hair was
long and flowed about the shoulders. But what struck Jim most forcibly
was the look of utter gentleness and benignity upon these faces.
"I guess we've fallen into pretty good hands after all," he whispered
to Parrish.
But one of the dignitaries upon the platform, an elderly man with a
face reminiscent of William Jennings Bryan in his inspired moments,
was leaning forward out of his curved chair and addressing the old
man, and, to Jim's astonishment, Parrish was answering.
But these were not the liquid accents of the Atlanteans. The words
resembled the barking of a dog, and across Jim's brain there suddenly
flashed the explanation. The dignitary was speaking in the tongue of
the Drilgoes, which Parrish, of course, would have learned in his five
years of captivity.
Suddenly Parrish turned to Jim. "He wants to know where we come from,"
he said. "I've told him from a far country. He thinks we're
ambassadors from some of the parts of Europe that the Atlanteans who
sailed away some years ago landed at. It's no use trying to
explain--they don't seem to have succeeded in inventing an Atom
Smasher for themselves."
Jim nodded, and the colloquy went on and on, while the Atlanteans
listened with languid interest, their kind and smiling faces seeming
to exude benignity. At length the session seemed to have ended.
Parrish wore a wide grin. "Everything's coming right, dear," he told
Lucille. "The old chap says we are to be the guests of the city either
for a night or for a week. It's something to do with the moon, and
there seems to be a full moon to-night. Some quaint superstition or
other. And then I guess we'll have a chance to get away in the Atom
Smasher. I've learned something of the mechanism, and it won't be hard
to operate it. We've fallen into good hands."
  *  *  *  *  *
A squad of four soldiers or policemen, with shorter robes and what
looked like truncheons in their hands, made signs to the three to
accompany them. Amid mutual bows, the city's guests filled into a
small court-way, closed at the further end, on which a number of
Atlanteans were standing.
While Jim was wondering what the next move was to be, to his
astonishment the whole courtyard began to rise slowly up the walls of
the tall buildings on either side.
"An elevator!" gasped Lucille. "Now I do feel that everything is
coming out all right, Jim, dear."
Jim did not question the psychology of this. He pressed her hand
tenderly. Already Tode and the past were becoming a bad dream.
"Did you say anything about the Atom Smasher, Parrish?" he asked.
"No, I thought it better not to," replied the old scientist. "You see,
they know it only as a force that neutralizes the blue-white ray. Best
not to let them know we're sailing for home in it."
"I think that was wise," answered Jim, and just then the rising
court-way came to a stop level with the top story of the great
building at one side.
Smiling courteously, the guards invited the three to precede them
inside an enormous hall, supported on pillars of gleaming stone
resembling alabaster. In the center was a small, low table, triangular
in shape, with three of the low, curved chairs. The guards invited the
three to be seated.
Almost immediately smiling servitors brought in fruits on platters of
porcelain, dishes of cooked vegetables, somewhat like the modern ones,
but seasoned and flavored with delicious herbs. The staple dish was
something like an oval banana, but infinitely more succulent. The
three fell to and made a hearty meal, which was washed down with fine
wines.
"We've certainly fallen into good hands," said Jim. "All we've got to
do is to lie low, and look pleasant, and it won't be long before we
get an opportunity to get hold of the Atom Smasher."
  *  *  *  *  *
The guards, seeing that they had finished their meal, smilingly
invited them to accompany them through a huge bronze door at one end
of the hall. It swung back, disclosing complete darkness.
Jim felt Lucille's hand upon his arm. The girl was hesitating, and for
a moment Jim hesitated too, half afraid of a fall into emptiness. Then
he heard the footsteps of the guards ahead, and went on.
It was eery, moving there with the sound of feet in front of them,
and, apart from that, utter silence. Then Lucille uttered a little
cry.
"Jim, do you feel something pushing you?" she asked.
"There is something--" Jim swung around, but some invisible force
continued to propel him forward. He moved sidewise, and the force
gently corrected him. The sound of footsteps had ceased.
"What is it, Jim?" cried the girl. "Help me! Something's got hold of
me!"
Old Parrish was struggling close beside them. Jim panted as he
wrestled with the force, but his efforts were absolutely futile.
Slowly, as if slid on wires, he was propelled forward, until a cushion
of air seemed to block his further progress.
Dark as it was, and silent, Jim had the consciousness of other human
beings about him, of a vast, unseen multitude that was watching him.
Suddenly the droning of a chant began to fill the place, as if a
priest were intoning hymns. As that chant rose and fell, voices all
about took up the echoing refrain. Jim tried to reach Lucille, but he
could move his arm only a few inches against that resilient force
pressing in on all sides of him.
Then, in an instant, a blinding, stabbing light shot through his
eyeballs. He heard Lucille scream, old Parrish yelp, and, with eyelids
screwed tight against the intolerable glare, fought once more
desperately and ineffectively to reach Lucille's side.
  *  *  *  *  *
Slowly Jim managed to unscrew his eyes. He began to realize that he
was standing in what appeared to be an enormous amphitheatre. But high
up, upon a narrow tongue of flooring that ran like a bridge from one
end to the other, with Lucille on his right and Parrish on his left.
Nothing visible seemed to be restraining them, and yet they were as
securely held as if fastened with tight chains.
Jim's brain reeled as he looked down. Imagine a bridge about half-way
up an amphitheatre of a hundred stories, the ground beneath packed
with human beings no larger than ants, the whole of the vast interior
lined with them, tier above tier, faces and forms increasing from
pismire size below to the dimensions of the human form upon a level,
and, again, fading almost to pin-points at the summit of the vast
building, where the soft glow of the artificial light filtered through
the glass of the roof.
He clutched at the air, felt the soft pressure of the force that was
restraining him, looked at Lucille, and saw her half-unconscious with
fear, leaning against it, leaning against that soft, resilient,
cushionlike, invisible substance; looked at Parrish, whom the shock
had thrown into a sort of semi-catalepsy--Parrish, mouthing and
staring!
He looked forward to where the tongue of flooring ended. Here, upon a
stage, flanked with huge carven figures, a group was gathered. At
first he was unable to discern what was being enacted there, so
brilliant was the light that glared overhead.
It was the Eye, a round disc perhaps ten feet in diameter, that
all-seeing Eye of Atlantis that guarded the great city, but how it
worked Jim was totally unable to discover. He saw, however, that it
was blinking rapidly, the alternations being so swift that it was only
just possible to be conscious of them. Perhaps the Eye was opening and
closing ten times a second.
Jim strained his eyes to see what was taking place on the stage at the
end of the tongue on which he stood. What was it? What were they doing
there? And was that the captured Atom Smasher standing between what
looked like grinning idols? A group of captured Drilgoes near it?
A shrill scream from Lucille echoed through the vast amphitheatre. Her
eye had seen what Jim's had not yet seen--something that had shocked
her into complete unconsciousness.
A marble figure, she stood leaning against the invisible force that
kept her on her feet, and in those open, staring eyes was a look of
ineffable horror.
  *  *  *  *  *
Jim could see clearly now, for the light from the Eye was slowly
diminishing in brilliancy, or else his own eyes were growing more
accustomed to it. Those carven figures, forming a semi-circle upon the
platform were figures of gods, squat, huge forms seeming to emerge out
of the blocks of rock from which they had been fashioned.
Hideous, gruesome carvings they were, resembling some futuristic
sculpture of to-day, for the artist who had fashioned them had given
hardly more than a hint of the finished representation. It was rather
as if the masses of rock that had been transported there had become
vitalized, foreshadowing the dim yet awful beings that were some day
to emerge from them.
Only the arms were clearly sculptured, and each of the half-dozen
figures squatting upon its haunches in that semi-circle had four of
them. Arms that protruded so as to form an interlacing network, and
the fingers were long claws fashioned of some metal. Over the arms the
shapeless heads beat down with a leering look, and from each mouth
protruded a curved tongue.
A masterpiece of horror, that group, like the great stone figures of
the Aztecs, or some of the hideous Indian gods. Seen under the glare
of the Eye, they formed a background of horrible omen. In a flash it
dawned upon Jim that these hideous figures might be gods of bloody
sacrifice.
"That's why these people seem so gentle," he heard himself saying.
"It's the--the contrast."
He pulled himself together. Again he tried to move towards Lucille,
and again that invisible force restrained him.
Yes, it was the captured Atom Smasher upon the platform, and those
forms grouped in front of the dignitaries were captured Drilgoes, a
dozen or so of them. And the concealed priest was droning a chant
again. Every other sound was hushed, but from each square foot of the
great amphitheatre a pair of eyes was watching.
A myriad of eyes turned upon the platform! What was going to happen
next?
  *  *  *  *  *
Suddenly the priest's voice died away, and simultaneously the three
dignitaries, who seemed to be officiating priests, from their solemn
gestures, stepped backward, passing beneath the protruding arms of the
idols. There sounded the deep whir of some mechanism somewhere, and
the same invisible force that had Jim and his two companions in its
control suddenly began to agitate the captive Drilgoes.
_It was shuffling them!_ It was forcing them into line, pushing here
and pulling there, in spite of the Drilgoes' terrified struggles. They
writhed and twisted, groaning and clicking in abject terror as they
wrestled with that unseen power, and all in vain. Slowly the foremost
of the Drilgoes was propelled forward, inch by inch, until he stood
immediately beneath the interlacing arms.
And what happened next filled Jim with sick horror and loathing. For
of a sudden the arms began to move, the iron claws cut through the
air--a shriek of terror and anguish broke from the Drilgo's mouth ...
and he was no longer a man, but a clawed and pulped mass of human
flesh!
"Aiah! Aiah! Aiah!" broke from the throats of the assembled multitude.
The weaving arms had stopped. From behind them an attendant was
gathering up what had been the Drilgo in a basket. Then the mechanism
had begun again, and again that shrill cry of the spectators was
ringing in Jim's ears.
Louder still rose the shriek of old Parrish as he understood. Jim put
forth all his strength in a mad effort to break free. A child would
have had more chance in the grip of a giant. And each time the arms of
the gods revolved, the unseen force pushed Jim, Lucille, and Parrish
nearer the platform.
Now Jim understood. This horrible sacrifice was a part of the religion
of the Atlanteans, and he, Lucille, and Parrish, were being reserved
for the final spectacle.
And at the sight of Lucille beside him, stonily unconscious, and yet
standing, and moving like a mechanical doll, in little forward
jerks--at the sight of the girl, hardly six feet distant, and yet
utterly beyond the touch of his finger-tips, Jim went mad. He would
not shout; he closed his lips in pride of race, pride of that
civilization that he had left twelve thousand years ahead of him. Not
like the shrieking Drilgoes on the platform, howling as each of them
in turn was forced into that maze of revolving knives. But he fought
as a madman fights. He hammered at the resilient air, while the sweat
ran down his face, he braced his feet upon the wooden tongue, and
sought to stay his forward progress. And all the while that infernal
force moved him steadily onward.
  *  *  *  *  *
He was on the platform now. He was traveling the same route that the
Drilgoes had taken. The unseen force was shuffling him, Lucille, and
Parrish, pushing and pulling them. And, despite Jim's efforts, it was
Lucille who was first of the three ... and Jim second ... and old
Parrish third....
Jim heard Parrish's hoarse whisper behind him, "Death! Death! The
uranium!" He was fumbling at his breast, but the significance of the
words and gestures escaped him. He was staring ahead. Only three
living Drilgoes of the whole number of prisoners remained alive, and
suddenly it was borne in upon Jim that he knew the last of the three.
It was the Drilgo, Cain, who had been their companion in the Atom
Smasher--there, not a dozen feet distant. Cain, his bestial face, with
the ridged eyebrows and great jaws convulsed with terror and dripping
sweat. Cain, immediately in front of Lucille.
"God, let her not wake! Let her never know!" Jim breathed. The agony
would be but momentary. And there was nothing a man could not endure
if he must. He could even endure to see Lucille become--what the
Drilgoes had become. It would soon be over now.
The Eye was blinking overhead. The hideous stone faces of the
Atlantean gods looked down in leering mockery. Another of the Drilgoes
had gone the same route as the others. Cain was the second now,
Lucille the third victim, and he, Jim, would be the fourth.
Gritting his teeth, Jim saw the next Drilgo propelled forward into the
whirling knives. He saw the man fling up his arms, as if to shield his
head--and then he was a man no longer, and the horrible knives
revolved, and "Aiah! Aiah! Aiah!" cried the multitude.
Once more the mechanism whirred.... Once more the arms revolved. A
howl of terror broke from Cain's lips as he was propelled onward....
Then suddenly the whirring stopped. The arms of the stone gods, with
their hooked, razorlike claws, to which clung particles of flesh, were
arrested in mid-air. Cain, unharmed, was leaning backward, his
features set in a mask of awful fear.
Simultaneously Jim knew that the force which had held him in thrall
was gone. He flung his arms out. He was free. He grasped Lucille, held
her tightly against his breast, stood there drawing great, labored
breaths, waiting--for what?
  *  *  *  *  *
A film was creeping over his eyes, but he was aware that the Eye had
suddenly gone out. And out of the dark the priest was chanting.
Then came a deep-drawn sigh from the spectators, followed by a ringing
shout. In place of the Eye the full moon appeared, sailing overhead.
And, holding off that deathly weakness, Jim understood. The sacrifice
had ended; a new month had begun....
CHAPTER VII
_Back to Long Island_
Jim, seated beside Lucille, was listening to Cain's gruntings and
chucklings as he expounded the situation to old Parrish.
It was the day following the scene in the amphitheatre. The four had
been escorted back along the tongue of flooring into a hall with walls
of fretted stone and sumptuous colorings. The floor was strewn with
rich rugs woven of some vegetable fibre. There were divans and low
chairs. At brief intervals, servitors, always smiling, passed carrying
trays with wines and foods. And in the corridors were always glimpses
of the guards.
"It was the rising of the full moon saved our lives, Dent," Parrish
explained. "It appears they have this sacrifice at each of the moon's
phases. The victims, captives or criminals, are eaten by the priests.
We've got a week's respite, Dent, and then--God help us."
Jim's arm tightened about Lucille, but the girl turned and smiled into
his face. There was no longer any fear there. And Jim swore to himself
that he would yet find some way of outwitting their devilish captors.
"What the devil are we supposed to be, criminals or what?" he asked
her father. "Why do they smile at us all the time in that confounded
way?"
Parrish questioned the Drilgo, but apparently he was unable to explain
himself to him. "Maybe they think it an honor for us, Dent," he
answered, "or maybe it's their idea of etiquette. Anyway, we four are
to head the list when the moon's at the three-quarters. God, if only
we could reach the Atom Smasher, I'm certain I could find out how it
works!"
  *  *  *  *  *
Jim had tried more than once to reach it. Through the colonnades at
the end of the hall he could see the mechanism standing on the
platform, always being inspected by half a dozen or so of the
dignitaries of Atlantis. But all his attempts to cross that tongue of
flooring had been vetoed by the guards.
They had presented their hands to him, palms outward, and on the palms
were fine steel points, about two inches long, set into leather
gauntlets. It had been impossible to try conclusions with them.
Two days went by. Once a group of dignitaries had entered the hall
and, with smiles and profuse bows, inspected the prisoners. Then they
had departed. And Jim had paced the floor, to and fro, thinking
desperately.
There was no sort of weapon with which to hazard an attack. Jim knew
that they were under the closest observation. He could only wait and
hope. And if all else failed, he meant to hurl himself, with Lucille
in his arms, off the tongue of floor into the depths below when their
time came.
On the third morning, after a troubled sleep induced by very
weariness, Jim was awakened by one of the guards, and started up to
see one of the bowing dignitaries before him, and Parrish and Lucille
sitting up among their rugs.
Bowing repeatedly, the smiling old man addressed some words to Jim,
and then turned to Parrish.
"He says he wants you to show him the way the Atom Smasher works,"
said Parrish. "Now's our chance, Dent. He thinks it's simply an
apparatus for neutralizing the blue-white ray. Don't let him guess--"
"I won't let him guess," Jim answered. "Tell him we'll go and show
him--"
"I've told him, and he says only you are to go. He's suspicious. Say
something quickly, Dent."
"Tell him," said Jim, "that I must have my two assistants and the
lady. Tell him I may also need the help of some of his people. It
requires many men to operate the machine."
  *  *  *  *  *
Parrish translated, speaking in the Drilgo tongue, which was their
only means of communication. The Atlantean considered. Then he spoke
again.
"He says that we three men may go, but Lucille must be left behind,"
groaned Parrish.
"The answer is no," said Jim.
The old dignitary, who seemed somewhat crestfallen, departed with an
expressive gesture. Jim and Parrish looked at each other.
"That's our end," groaned Parrish.
"No, he'll bite," answered Jim, with the first grin that had appeared
on his countenance since their arrival. "Let's make our plans quickly.
We must contrive to get Lucille inside the machine, under the pretense
of assisting with the mechanism. And Cain, of course," he added,
glancing at the goggly-eyed Drilgo. "You do your best to locate the
starting mechanism, Parrish, and signal me the moment you're ready.
We'll both leap in, and the four of us will sail--God, I don't care
where we sail to, so long as we get away from here! Into eternity, if
need be. But I hope it's Long Island!"
Back came the dignitary with two of the guards. Smiling at Jim, he
indicated by signs that the three others might accompany him. The
Atlanteans had bitten, as Jim had forecast.
The four proceeded along the hall and over the tongue of flooring.
This time the force that had previously controlled their movements was
not in action. At the farther end of the bridge they saw the group of
dignitaries gathered about the Atom Smasher, examining it curiously.
Over their heads the hooked arms of the hideous gods were raised. The
Eye was darkened, as if with a curtain, and through the glass roof,
high overhead, the sunlight streamed down upon the empty amphitheatre.
  *  *  *  *  *
In spite of their smiles, the dignitaries of Atlantis were very much
on the alert, as their tense attitudes denoted. Two more guards had
appeared, and Jim saw that they were uncovering some apparatus at the
base of the Eye. They were swinging a camera-like object toward him,
its lens focused upon the Atom Smasher. It was not difficult to
understand what was in the minds of the Atlanteans. The dignitaries
were uneasy and mistrustful, and at the first suspicion of treachery
they meant to loose the blue-white Ray contained in the apparatus, and
blow the Atom Smasher and the group about it to destruction.
Jim intercepted a sign from Parrish, indicating that he was to make
pretense of assisting him. He bent over the machine, Lucille beside
him. Parrish was busily examining the wheels and levers. He was
adjusting the thumbscrews, moving the needles along the dials.
One of the Atlanteans spoke, and Cain translated into "Drilgo" for
Parrish's benefit. Parrish answered. Then, without raising his head,
the old man said quietly, "I've located the starting lever, Dent. You
and Lucille get inside quickly and pretend you're doing something to
the machinery."
They stepped over the bow of the boat and stood beside Parrish, who
continued examining the wheels. "We mustn't forget Cain," whispered
the girl to her father. "Oh, I hope he understands!"
But there was no direct evidence that Cain did understand, and Parrish
dared not warn him in "Drilgo," for fear one of the Atlanteans might
understand the language. Cain was standing close beside the boat. But
he was not in the boat.
Again one of the Atlanteans shot a question at Parrish. Parrish
beckoned to Cain, and awaited the translation. He answered.
Each moment was growing tenser. It was impossible that the Atlanteans
could fail to understand what was being planned. The only saving
chance was that they did not realize the possibilities of escape that
the vessel offered. A full minute went by.
  *  *  *  *  *
Suddenly Parrish raised his head. "I've got it fixed, I think, Dent,"
he said. "I'm going to count. When I reach 'three,' seize Cain and
pull him aboard."
Jim nodded. The uneasiness was increasing. The guards at the
camera-like object were each holding some sort of mechanical accessory
in their hands. It looked like a small sphere of glass, and it
connected with the apparatus by means of a hollow tube of fibre. Jim
guessed that in an instant the Ray could be made to dart out of the
lens. It would be quick work--as nearly as possible instantaneous
work.
"Ready, Dent?" asked Parrish in an even voice. In this crisis the old
man had become astonishingly calm. He seemed the calmest of the lot.
"One!"
Jim beckoned to Cain, who came toward him, his eyes goggling in
inquiry.
"Two!"
Jim reached out and took Cain by the arm. There was a sharp question
from the Atlantean who had spoken before.
"Three!"
With all his force Jim yanked Cain over the edge of the boat. The
Drilgo stumbled and fell headlong with a howl of terror. But
headlong--inside.
What happened was practically instantaneous. A sudden whir of the
mechanism, a violet glow from the funnel, the smell of chlorine--a
flash of blinding blue-white light. The Atlantean guards had fired--a
quarter-second too late!
The thump, thump of the electrical discharge died away. The four were
in the boat, whirling away through space. Cain was rising to his
knees, a woe-begone expression on his face. And there was a clean cut,
with charred, black edges along one side of the boat, showing how near
the Atlanteans had come to success.
  *  *  *  *  *
The relief, after the hideous suspense of the past days, was almost
too much for the three white people. "We're free, we're going back
home!" cried Jim exultantly, as he caught Lucille in his arms. And she
surrendered her lips to his, while the tears streamed down her checks.
Old Parrish, at the instrument board, looked up, smiling and
chuckling. Even Cain, understanding that they were not to be hacked to
bits with knives, gurgled and grinned all over his black face.
"How long will it take us to get back?" Jim asked Parrish after a
while.
"I--I'm not quite sure, my boy," the old man replied. "You see--I
haven't quite familiarized myself with the machine as yet."
"But we'll get back all right?" asked Jim.
"Well, we--we're headed in the right direction," answered Parrish.
"You see, my boy, it's rather an intricate table of logarithmic
calculations that that scoundrel has pasted on this board. The great
danger appears to be that of coming within the orbit of the giant
planet Jupiter. Of course, I'm trying to keep within the orbit of the
Earth, but there is a danger of being deflected onto Pallas, Ceres, or
one of the smaller asteroids, and finding ourselves upon a rock in
space."
Jim and Lucille looked at Parrish in consternation. "But you don't
have to leave the Earth, do you?" Jim asked.
"Unfortunately, it's pretty hard sticking to the Earth, my lad," said
Parrish. "You see, Earth has moved a good many million miles through
space since the time of Atlantis."
But both Jim and Lucille noticed that Parrish was already speaking of
Atlantis as if it was in the past. They drew a hopeful augury from
that. And then there was nothing to do but resign themselves to that
universal greyness--and to hope.
  *  *  *  *  *
They noticed that Cain seemed to be watching Parrish's movements with
unusual interest. The Neanderthal man seemed fascinated by the play of
the dials, the whir of the wheels and gyroscopes.
"Are you setting a course, dad?" asked Lucille presently. "I mean, do
you know just where we are?"
"To tell you the truth, my dear," answered her father, "I don't. I'm
relying on some markings that Tode made on the chart--certain
combinations of figures. God only knows where they'll take us to. But
I'm hoping that by following them we shall find ourselves back on Long
Island in the year 1930.
"No, that rascal could hardly have written down those figures to no
purpose. They seem to me to comprise a course, both going and
returning. But the calculations are very intricate, especially in the
_time_ dimension. I've nearly reached the last row now. Then, we shall
have arrived, or--we sha'n't."
Jim and Lucille sat down again. There was nothing that they could do.
But somehow their hopes of reaching Long Island in the year of grace
1930 had grown exceedingly slim. Everything depended upon whether or
not Tode had meant those figures to represent the course back to the
starting point or not.
A desperate hope--that was all that remained to them. They watched
Parrish as his eyes wandered along the rows of figures, while his
fingers moved the micrometer screws. And then he looked up.
"We're reaching the end of our course," he said. "We're going to land
somewhere. God knows where it will be. We must hope--that's all that's
left us."
His hands dropped from the dials. He pressed a lever. The blur of
nights and days began to slow. A column of vivid violet light shot
from the funnel.
"Grip tight!" shouted Parrish.
Thump, thump! The Atom Smasher was vibrating violently. A jar threw
Jim against Lucille. It was coming to a standstill. Trees appeared.
Jim uttered a shout. He stepped across to Parrish and wrung his hand.
He put his arms about Lucille and kissed her.
They were back at the Vanishing Place, and all their sufferings seemed
to be of the past....
CHAPTER VIII
_A Fruitless Journey_
"Why don't you stop the boat, Parrish?"
"I'm trying to, lad!"
The Atom Smasher was still vibrating, even more violently than before.
A column of violet light was pouring from her funnel. The pool, the
mud, the walls of heaped up water were discernible, but all quivering
and reproduced, line after line, to infinity. It was like looking into
the rear-view mirror of a car that is vibrating rapidly. It was like
one of those Cubist paintings of a woman descending the stairs, where
one had to puzzle out which is the woman and which is the stairs.
A dreadful thought shot through Jim's mind. He remembered what he had
said to Tode: "You can't hold the boat still in four-dimensional
space."
This was not quite the same. By stopping the infernal mechanism, one
re-entered three-dimensional space, and landed. Certainly the Atom
Smasher could land. They were not like the motorcyclist who got on a
machine for the first time, and rode to the admiration of all who saw
him, except that he couldn't find out how to stop.
Yet there was Parrish still fumbling with the controls, and the boat
was still vibrating at a terrific rate of speed. It is impossible to
dream of leaping out, for there was no solidity, no continuity in the
scenery outside.
It was not like attempting to leap from a moving train, for instance.
In that case one knows that there is solid earth beneath, however hard
one lands. Here everything was distorted, a sort of mirror reflection.
And Jim noticed a strange thing that had never occurred to him before.
Everything was reversed, as in a mirror picture. That clump of trees,
for instance, which should have been on the right, was on the left.
Parrish looked up. "There's some means of stopping her, of course," he
said. "There must be a lever--but I don't know where to look for it in
all this mess." He pointed to the revolving wheels. No, it might be a
matter of days of experimenting in order to discover the elusive
switch.
"It may be a combination of switches," said Parrish. "I don't know
what we're going to do."
"Suppose I jumped and chanced it," Jim suggested.
Lucille caught his arm with a little cry. Parrish shook his head.
"That devil--Listen: there was a Drilgo he disliked. He threw him out
of the boat just before she landed at the cave. Everything was in
plain sight, plainer than things are here. But he was never seen
again. For God's sake, lad, sit still. I'll try--"
  *  *  *  *  *
Hours later Parrish was still trying. And gradually Jim and Lucille
had ceased to hope.
Side by side they had sat, watching that glimmering scene about them.
Sometimes everything receded into a blur, across which sunlight and
shadow, and then moonlight raced, at others the surroundings were so
clear that it almost seemed as if, by steadying the boat, they could
leap ashore. And once there happened something that sent a thrill of
cold fear through both of them.
For where the pool had been there appeared suddenly a hut--and Tode,
standing in the doorway, looking about him, a malicious sneer curving
his lips.
Jim leaped to his feet, and old Parrish, who had seen Tode too, sprang
up in wild excitement.
"Sit down, lad," he shouted. "It's nothing. I--I turned the micrometer
screw a trifle hard. I got us back to five years ago, when we were
living here with Tode. That's just a picture--out of the past, Jim!"
Jim understood, but he sank down again with cold sweat bathing his
forehead. The terrific powers of the Atom Smasher were unveiling
themselves more and more each moment. Jim felt Lucille's hand on his
arm. He looked into her face.
"Jim, darling, what's going to happen to us if dad can't find how to
work the machine?"
"I don't know, dear. I've thought that we might all jump out and
chance it. If we held each other tight, we'd probably land in the same
place--"
  *  *  *  *  *
Old Parrish stood up. "I can't work it, Jim," he said. "Tode's got us
beat. There's only one thing for us to do. You can guess what it is."
"I think I can," said Jim, glancing askance at Lucille. Yes, he knew,
but he lacked the heart to tell her. "If we were all to jump out,
tied together--don't you think we might land--somewhere near where we
want to land?" he asked.
"Jim, do you realize what each vibration of this boat means?" asked
Parrish. "There's a table on the instrument-board. It's a wave length
of four thousand miles in space and nineteen years in time."
"You mean we're moving to London or San Francisco and back--"
"Further than that, every infinite fraction of a second," answered
Parrish. "No, Jim, we--we wouldn't land. So we must just go back to
where we came from, and--"
He had been speaking in a low voice, calculated not to reach Lucille's
ears. The girl had been leaning back, her eyes closed, as if half
asleep. Now she rose and stepped up to her father and lover. "You can
tell me the truth," she said. "I'm not afraid."
"We've got to go back, Lucille," answered her father. "It's our only
chance. By following the course in reverse we can expect to make
Atlantis again--"
"Back to that horrible place?"
"No, my dear. The chart will lead us, obviously, back to the cave
where Tode has his headquarters. We must try to surprise him, and
force him to bring us back to Long Island."
"And then?" asked Lucille.
Parrish shrugged his shoulders. "We'll face that problem when we come
to it," he answered.
"But how do you expect to be able to land at the other end any more
than this?" asked Jim. "Suppose the machine continues to vibrate
instead of coming to a standstill?"
"I think," said Parrish, "that we'll be able to strike a bargain with
Tode. Obviously he will be willing to bring the machine to a
standstill in order to parley with us. We'll make terms--the best we
can. After all, he can't afford to remain marooned on the isle of
Atlantis without the Atom Smasher."
"I hate the idea of bargaining with that wretch," said Lucille.
"So do we all, dear," answered Jim. "But there's nothing else that we
can do. It's just a matter of give and take. And I'd be glad to
consent to any terms that would bring us three safe back to earth,
with all this business behind us."
"I'll start back, then," said Parrish, turning back to the instrument
board.
And, to the familiar thump, thump of the electrical discharge, the
Atom Smasher took up its backward journey once more.
  *  *  *  *  *
A long time passed. With her head resting against Jim's breast,
Lucille rested. Jim bent over her, trying to discover whether she was
asleep or not. Her eyes were closed, her breathing so soft that she
hardly seemed alive. An infinite pity for the girl filled Jim's heart,
and, mingled with it, the intense determination to overcome the madman
who had subjected her to these perils. He glanced across at Parrish,
fingering his screws. Old Parrish looked up and nodded. There was a
new determination in the old man's face that made him a different
person from the crazed old man whom Jim had encountered at the
Vanishing Place.
"We can beat him, Parrish!" Jim called, and Parrish looked back and
nodded again. "We're nearly back to the top of the column," he
answered.
Not long afterward Parrish looked up once more. "Stand by, Jim!" he
called. "And be ready. Tode will be aware of our approach by means of
the sensitive instruments he keeps in his laboratory. But don't harm
him. We want him aboard, and we want him badly. He won't be able to
play any more tricks with us. I've learned too much about the Atom
Smasher."
He pressed a lever, and the greyness dissolved into its component
parts of light and darkness. A jar. Thump, thump! The violet light!
Lucille looked up, raised herself, uttered a low cry and caught at
Jim's arm, trembling.
They had run their course truly. The Atom Smasher was vibrating
outside the entrance to Tode's cave. And that was Tode, standing
there, watching them, that devilish grin of his accentuated to the
utmost. A blurred figure that appeared and vanished, and a surrounding
crowd of Drilgoes--how many it was impossible to guess, for they
looked like a crowd of apes in motion.
Suddenly Tode disappeared, and a moment later Lucille uttered a
terrified cry as his voice spoke in her ear:
"I thought you'd be back. I knew you'd got away from Atlantis when my
recorder showed the waves of electrical energy proceeding from the
city. You were clever, Dent, but you see, you had to come back to me
to get my help."
"Don't be afraid, dear," said Jim, trying to soothe the girl. "That's
a wireless receiving apparatus." He pointed to a sort of cabinet
enclosed among the rotating wheels, and then it was evident that
Tode's voice was proceeding from it.
  *  *  *  *  *
Tode's figure appeared again, dancing through a haze of lines and
patches. He was holding something in his hand which Jim made out to be
the mouthpiece of a microphone. The voice inside the Atom Smasher
spoke again:
"Turn all the micrometer screws until the needles register zero,
Parrish. Then turn Dial D to point 3, Dial C to 5, Dial B to 1, and
Dial A to 2. I'll repeat.... Now press the starting lever, Parrish,
and you'll find yourself on firm ground again."
A few moments later the Atom Smasher was pouring out an immense column
of the violet light, and slowly the vibration ceased. The blurred
forms of Tode, of the Drilgoes grew clear. They had arrived.
Tode stepped over the rail. "And now, my friends, we'll have a talk,"
he said.
"No tricks, Tode," Jim warned him, "You've probably got a number of
deviltries up your sleeve--"
"One or two, Dent," grinned Tode.
"We're willing to negotiate."
"Of course you are. You see, I hold the trumps, Dent. Those dial
deflections, which are inevitable in the construction of any piece of
mechanism, are not the same for Earth in 1920. Don't think you can use
the same figures to land with. You must remember that there has been a
precession of the equinoxes since the time of Atlantis, with a
consequent shift in the earth's axis. No, Dent, I've got you very much
where I want you. But I'm willing to discuss terms with you. First of
all, let's get rid of this useless cargo. I don't believe in
overburdening a ship," he grinned.
He picked up Cain bodily and heaved the astonished Drilgo over the
side before he knew what was happening to him. Cain picked himself up
and rubbed his sides, whimpering mournfully. The Drilgoes crowded
closer, their faces agape with astonishment. Tode spoke a command
sharply, and they scattered.
  *  *  *  *  *
"Before we come to terms, Dent, I'll give you a piece of news that may
interest you," said Tode. "Much has happened during the time you've
been away. Ambassadors have been out to see me from Atlantis. With the
aid of a Drilgo interpreter, they conveyed to me that they had been
greatly impressed by the disappearance of the Atom Smasher. They have
nothing like it, of course, and they think I'm a Number One magician.
"The upshot is, they want me to accept the supreme rule of the city,
and use my arts to restore the lost territory that has sunk beneath
the waves. They swore on an image of their god, Cruk, that they were
sincere. I told them that I'd sent the Atom Smasher away on a journey,
but that it would be back shortly, and that I'd then give them their
answer.
"Now, Dent"--Tode's face took on that look of fanaticism that Jim had
seen on it before--"I'm going to repeat the proposition I made to you
before. Join me. I'll make you my chief subordinate, and I'll load you
and Parrish down with honors. Everything that a human being can desire
shall be yours. And in a year or two, when we're tired of being gods,
we'll take the Atom Smasher back to Earth and destroy it, and with our
wealth we'll become the supreme rulers of Earth too. I need you, Dent.
You don't realize how lonely life can be when one is worshiped as a
god. As for Lucille, there are a thousand maidens more beautiful than
she is, in Atlantis. Come, Dent, your answer! Your last chance, Dent!
Don't throw it away!"
He read the answer before Jim could speak it. Jim saw Tode's face
flicker, and hurled himself upon him. Lucille screamed. The two men
wrestled together in the narrow confines of the circular boat. Jim
struck Tode a blow that sent him reeling against the rail. Then he
felt himself seized from behind. A giant Drilgo had him in his arms.
He lifted him over the side and flung him to the earth. In an instant
the chattering Drilgoes were crowding down upon him.
Struggling madly, Jim saw Tode fell old Parrish with a blow, push back
Lucille as she sprang at him, and quickly press the starting lever.
The column of violet fire faded, there came the whir of the
mechanism--the Atom Smasher vanished....
CHAPTER IX
_The Blinded Eye_
Jim fought with all his strength; he managed to shake off his
assailants and regain his feet. Then one of the Drilgoes poised his
stone-tipped spear, ready to hurl it through his body.
But the spear never left the Drilgo's hand in Jim's direction. Like a
great black ape, Cain leaped upon the fellow and bore him to the
ground, his feet twined around his shoulders, his hands gripping his
throat. Not until the Drilgo had been reduced to a heaving,
half-strangled hulk did Cain leave him.
Then Cain, bending until his stomach almost touched the ground, came
worming toward Jim, making signs of obeisance.
What had happened that Jim had won the Drilgo's faith? Why did Cain
now look upon him, apparently, as his master? It was impossible to
gauge the processes of the black man's mind, and at the moment Jim was
in no mood to wonder. The stunning disaster that had overtaken him
monopolized his thoughts.
Lucille and Parrish were once more in Tode's power. That was the
dominating fact. The only gleam of comfort in the situation was that
Tode had given him the clue to his movements.
Beyond a doubt Tode had taken his captives into Atlantis with him. It
was impossible to disbelieve Tode's statement that he had been offered
the supreme power in the city. Tode's egotism would have compelled him
to blurt out that fact. Besides, Tode had certainly not gone back to
earth.
Jim must force his way into Atlantis. He would find and rescue the two
prisoners or die there.
He turned away from the groveling Cain and the chattering Drilgoes,
who, inspired by Cain's example, now seemed animated by the same
instinct to obey him, and went into the cave. But at the entrance he
turned for a moment and looked back.
  *  *  *  *  *
It was night. The valley was swathed in mists, the volcano opposite
was spouting a shaft of lurid fire. On the water was a path of
moonlight, where the clouds had been dispersed by the Atlanteans. Jim
took in the scene, he raised one arm and shook his fist. Then, without
a word, he passed inside.
There was a soft light in the cave, streaming out from an inner
chamber, access to which was through a narrow orifice in the rock.
Jim passed through, and found himself in Tode's laboratory.
He was astonished at its completeness, still more so at the existence
of numerous pieces of apparatus whose purpose it was difficult to
understand. There was a radio transmitter and receiver, but improved
out of all recognition from those in use in the prosaic year 1930.
Three or four tiny dynamos, little more than toys in appearance, were
generating as much voltage, from the indicators, as a modern power
station. And overhead was a dial, with two series of figures in black
and red, and two needles, both of which were swinging briskly,
indicating that there was an intense electrical disturbance in the
vicinity.
The Atom Smasher! Jim took heart. Tode could not be far away! He
looked about him, subconsciously trying to discover some implement
that would prove of service to him, but there was nothing that he
could see, not even one of the ray tubes. He looked about uneasily.
Then his eyes fell upon something so singularly out of place that it
looked, for the moment, like some pre-historic weapon. It was the last
thing Jim would have expected to find there--nothing more nor less
than a sporting rifle!
Deer shooting had been one of Tode's pastimes in the old days, and
more than one fat buck had been surreptitiously shot for the benefit
of the larder at the Vanishing Place. There was something almost
pathetic in the sight of that rifle and the fifty cartridges in their
cardboard carton. Perhaps Tode had pictured himself shooting big game
in Atlantis at some period or other. It was a human weakness that for
an instant lessened Jim's hate and horror of the man. It brought him
to a saner view of the situation. Jim had been on the point of losing
his powers of reason. The sight of the rifle restored them.
  *  *  *  *  *
He turned sharply as he heard a sound in the entrance. Cain was coming
toward him, with many genuflexions, and much stomach wriggling. He
stopped, straightened himself. There was a look of singular
intelligence on the Drilgo's face.
He began chattering, pointing in the direction of Atlantis. Jim could
make nothing of what he was trying to convey.
"Yes, they're there," he said bitterly, "but I don't see how that's
going to help me."
"Oh my poor Lucille!" said Cain unexpectedly.
The words were like a parrot's speech, the intonation so remarkable a
copy of old Parrish's that Jim was flabbergasted. Nevertheless it was
evident that Cain knew he was referring to Lucille.
With a strange, slinking motion he crossed the laboratory and bent
beneath a huge slab of stone, resting on two great hewn rocks. He
emerged, holding in his arms two curious contrivances. He laid them at
Jim's feet.
Jim stared at them, and suddenly understood what they were. They were
two pairs of wings, of the kind the Atlanteans had used when they made
their aerial sortie against the Drilgoes.
Cain picked up one pair and began adjusting it about his body. He made
fluttering movements with his arms.
"You mean that you've learned how to fly, you black imp of Satan?"
shouted Jim.
And Cain, as if understanding, nodded and beamed all over his black
face.
With that Jim's idea was born. If the Drilgoes would follow him, he
would lead them against Atlantis. And, before the assault began, he
would fly to the great Eye that guarded it, and blind it.
  *  *  *  *  *
He thought afterward that it was like a supernatural revelation, this
scheme, that leaped full-fledged into his brain. And Cain had
developed extraordinary executive ability. Outside the cave, through
rifts in the swirls of fog, Jim could see innumerable Drilgoes massing
in the valley, as if they understood Jim's purpose. From Cain's
gesticulations, and the number of times he rubbed his stomach, it was
evident that he counted upon sacking Atlantis and was imagining
innumerable meals of fat captives.
Each flash of lurid light from the volcano disclosed further masses of
Drilgoes, armed with their stone spears, apparently assembling for the
attack. Whether Tode had summoned them before the Atlanteans offered
him the rulership of the city, or whether Jim's own plan had been
communicated to them by some telepathic process, it was impossible to
guess, but there was not the least doubt but that they were prepared
to follow him.
Cain nudged Jim and began strapping the other pair of wings about his
body. Jim saw that the energy was supplied by two tiny, lights burning
in the base, cold fire, stored energy whose strength he did not guess.
For, when Cain took him by the hand, and motioned to him to slide the
knob in the groove, he was hurled skyward like a rocket.
There followed a delirious hour. Tossing and tumbling like a pigeon in
a gale, Jim by degrees acquired mastery over the apparatus. At the end
of the hour he could fly almost as well as Cain, who, like a black
guardian angel kept beside him, reaching out a hand when he
overbalanced, and pulling him out of aerial side-slips.
  *  *  *  *  *
Suddenly Cain motioned toward the volcano, and started toward it in a
rocketlike swoop. Jim understood. The Drilgoes were ready for the
attack upon Atlantis.
Jim dropped to earth, ran back into the cave, and picked up the rifle
and the carton of ammunition. He filled the magazine, and, with the
rifle on his arm, rose into the air again. Cain was circling back,
uttering weird cries of distress at finding his master absent.
"It's all right, Cain," said Jim. "I'm here."
Side by side they flew steadily toward the base of the great cone,
which was pouring out a fan-shaped stream of fire. Rumblings shook the
earth; it was evident that another upheaval was in course of
preparation. The long column of the Drilgoes could be seen, extending
around the flank of the mountain.
Then of a sudden the Eye opened. And across the causeway came the
blue-white Ray, carrying death and destruction.
The Drilgoes, who had learned wisdom, remained concealed out of the
Ray's path, and escaped, but a great dinosaur, fifty or sixty feet in
length, startled by the light, came blundering out of the ferns,
uttered a bellow, and melted into an amorphous mass. Birds dropped
from their roosting places with a sound like that of falling hail.
Black paths were cloven through the midst of the jungle.
Rifle in hand, Jim soared into the air, and shot forward, high above
the causeway toward the glowing Eye.
He had noticed that the blue-white ray appeared in cycles of about two
minutes, and had made his plans accordingly. Two minutes in which to
accomplish his task, or take the chance of a hideous death. Some
thirty seconds carried him right into the glowing heart of the winking
Eye: he hovered and raised his rifle.
Underneath him the breakers thundered: round the Eye a myriad
sea-birds fluttered, dashing themselves against it, falling into the
waves. Huge and high the great city towered into the skies, lit by its
soft incandescence. Jim could see the throngs in the streets, the
traffic. But what was happening in the other side of the Eye?
  *  *  *  *  *
Suddenly he saw the moon in her third quarter sailing through the
skies, and a hideous fear overcame him. Suppose Tode had met with
treachery; suppose that this very night Lucille were doomed to be
sacrificed to the terrible god Cruk!
Suppose that even at that moment her tender flesh were being
sacrificed by the awful hooks!
He drew a bead upon the Eye and fired--and missed. The bullet went
wide. But even if it struck, what guarantee had he that it would
shatter the glass, or whatever substance it was that covered the orb?
He lost position, and knew that the two-minute interval was drawing to
a close. He soared and fired again. The Eye still glowed.
Then of a sudden a blinding ray shot forth from it, so dazzling that
it seemed to sear Jim's eyeballs. The interval was ended.
It shot beneath him, but no more than a few feet, and turning his eyes
shoreward, Jim saw it sweep along the causeway and tear a black path
through the forest. Frantically he soared, and circled around the
temple.
The ray went out. Two minutes more. And now the temporary panic had
passed; Jim's nerves grew steady as a rock. He eased the controls and
floated in toward the glowing orb. Sea-mews, screaming, dashed
themselves against it and fell, wounded and broken, into the breaking
seas below. They fluttered past Jim's face, one impacted against his
chest with a thud that rocked him where he hovered.
But Jim knew that he could not fail. At a distance of fifty feet he
drew a bead upon the centre of the Eye and pressed the trigger.
And instantly the light went out....
CHAPTER X
_The Fight in the Dark_
He dropped down softly to the causeway. Within the city he heard a
sound such as he had never heard before, as if some ancient prophecy
of doom had been fulfilled, a wailing "Aiah! Aiah! Aiah!" that was
caught up from throat to throat and rose upon the wind in a clamor
wild and mournful as that of the sea-birds around the broken Eye. It
was the death-keening of proud Atlantis, Queen of the Atlantic for
fifty thousand years. She was dying in darkness.
For, with the blinding of the Eye, all the soft lights within the city
had gone out. Dense, utter, impenetrable darkness reigned, and even
the gibbous moon, floating overhead, seemed to give no light.
Jim dropped to the causeway and began running in the direction of the
city. But, feeling the drag of his wings, he unbuckled the strap and
flung them away. He might need them, but his one thought was to get to
Lucille, if she were still alive. And he felt that each moment lost
might mean that he would be too late.
Through the blackness he raced forward, hearing that sobbing ululation
within the walls. But behind him he heard another sound, and shuddered
at it, all his hopes suddenly reversed. For that sound was the
shouting of the Drilgoes as they rushed forward to conquest. And now
it seemed a monstrous thing that proud Atlantis should be at the mercy
of these hordes. He had let loose destruction upon the world. But it
was to save Lucille.
That was his consolation. Yet he hardly checked the racing thoughts
within his mind even for a moment, to meditate on what he had done.
Those thoughts were all of Lucille. He must get to her before the
Drilgoes entered. And he ran faster, panting, gasping, till of a
sudden the portals loomed before him, and he saw a crowd of frenzied
Atlanteans struggling to pass through, and a file of soldiers
struggling to keep them back.
  *  *  *  *  *
He could distinguish nothing more than the confused struggle. He
hurled himself into the midst of the crowd and swept it back. He was
within the walls now, and struggling to pass through the mob of people
that was swarming like homeless bees.
He fought them with flailing fists, he clove a pathway through them,
until he found himself in a great shadowy space that he recognized as
the central assembly of the city. More by instinct than design he hit
upon the narrow court that was the elevator. But the court was filled
with another mob of struggling people, and in the darkness there was
no possibility of discovering the secret of raising it.
He blundered about, raging, forcing a path now here, now there. He ran
into blind alleys, into small threading streets about the court, which
led him back into the central place of assembly. It was like a
nightmare, that blind search under the pale three-quarter moon and the
black, star-blotched sky.
Suddenly Jim found himself wedged by the pressure of the crowd into a
sort of recess leading off the elevator court. So strong was the
pressure here that he was unable to move an inch. Wedged bolt upright,
he could only wait and let the frenzied mob stream past him. And
louder above the sound of wailing came the roars of the Drilgoes
swarming along the causeway.
Suddenly something gave behind him--a door, as it seemed, broken off
its hinges by the mob pressure. Jim was hurled backward, and fell
heavily down a flight of stone stairs, bringing up against a stone
balustrade. He got up, unconscious of his bruises, ran to the top of
the flight, and saw the dim square of palest twilight where the door
had been.
But over him he could faintly see the stairs and the balustrade,
winding away to what seemed immeasurable height. That stairway must
lead to the top of the building, and thence there should be some
access to the amphitheatre. Jim turned toward it.
  *  *  *  *  *
Suddenly a tremendous uproar filled the streets, yells, the clicking
grunts of the Drilgoes, the screams of the panic-stricken populace.
The invaders had arrived, and they were sweeping all before them. No
chance of recognition in that darkness. Lucille! Shouting her name,
Jim began to ascend the stairs in leaps of three at a time.
But long before he reached the top he was ascending one by one, with
straining limbs and laboring breath. Red slaughter down below, a very
inferno of sound; above, that shadowy stairway, still extending almost
to the heavens. Step after step, flight beyond flight!
Jim's lungs were bursting, and his heart hammering as if it would
break his chest. One flight more! One more! Another! Suddenly he
realized that his task was ended. In place of the stairs stood a vast
hall, and beyond that another hall, dim in the faint light that
filtered through the glass above.
Jim thought he remembered where he was. Beyond that next hall there
should be the tongue of flooring, crossing the amphitheatre and
joining the platform of the idols. But he stopped suddenly as he
emerged, not upon the tongue, but upon still another stairway.
He had gone astray, and out of his bursting lungs a cry of rage and
despair went up. For a moment he stood still. What use to proceed
further?
And then, amazingly, there came what might have been a sign from
heaven. Down through a small, square opening overhead, no larger than
a ventilator, it came ... a glimmer of violet flame!
And Jim hurled himself like a madman against the stairs, and
surmounted them with two bounds. There were no more. Instead, Jim
found himself looking down into the amphitheatre.
The thick walls had cut off all sound from his ears, save a confused
murmur, but now a hideous uproar assailed them. The whole floor of the
amphitheatre was a mass of moving shadows, of slayers and slain.
The Drilgoes had broken in and trapped the multitudes that had taken
refuge there. Their fearful stone-tipped spears thrust in and out, to
the accompaniment of their savage howls and the screams of the dying.
  *  *  *  *  *
Never has such a shadow-play been seen, perhaps, as that below, where
death stalked in dense darkness, and the slayer did not even see his
victim. Only the thrust of spears, the soft, yielding flesh that they
encountered, the scream, the wrench of stone from tissue, and the
blended howl of triumph and scream of despair.
Yet only for a moment did Jim turn his eyes upon that sight. For he
knew where he was now. He had emerged upon the other side of the
amphitheatre, upon the platform where he had seen the priests and
dignitaries gathered when he was led forward to be sacrificed.
There, in the rear, were the hideous, shadowy gods, looming up out of
the darkness, their outstretched arms interlaced. And there upon the
platform was the Atom Smasher, a little thread of violet light seeping
out of the central tube.
Beside it stood a group of figures, impossible to distinguish in the
darkness, but of a sudden Lucille's scream rang out above the din
below.
With three leaps Jim was at her side. He saw the girl, Tode, and
Parrish, struggling in the grasp of a dozen priests. They were
dragging them toward the idols, and Jim understood what that scene
portended.
In despair at the irruption of the Drilgoes, the priests were seeking
to propitiate their gods by sacrificing the three strangers whom they
held responsible for all their woes.
Jim caught Lucille in his arms, shouting her name. She knew him,
turned toward him. Then one of the priests, armed with a great
stone-headed club--for no metal is permitted within the precincts of
the god Cruk--struck at him furiously.
Jim leaped aside, letting the club descend harmlessly upon the floor.
He shot out his right with all his strength behind it, catching the
priest upon the jaw, and the man crumpled.
  *  *  *  *  *
Whirling the club around his head, he fought back the fanatics, all
the while shouting to Tode to start the Atom Smasher. In such a moment
he only remembered that Tode was a white man, and of his own
generation.
He struck down three of the priests; then he was seized around the
knees from behind, and fell heavily. The club was wrenched from his
hand. In another moment Jim found himself helpless in the grasp of the
Atlanteans.
As he stopped struggling for a moment, to gather his strength for a
supreme effort, he heard a whir overhead, and saw the arms of the
stone gods begin their horrible revolution. The priests had started
the machinery. And high above the din below rang out the wild chant of
the high priest.
Jim saw him now, a figure poised upon a platform behind the arms, his
own arms raised heavenward.
"Aiah! Aiah! Aiah!"
Jim was being dragged forward, with Lucille beside him, old Parrish
following, still making a futile struggle for life, while pitiful
screeches issued from his mouth.
Jim saw the revolving arms descend within a foot of his head. One more
fight--one more, the last.
Suddenly, with loud yells, a band of Drilgoes leaped forward from the
head of the stairs and rushed upon the struggling priests and victims.
And, dark as it was, Jim recognized their leader--Cain.
And Cain knew Lucille. As the priests rallied for a desperate
resistance, Cain hurled his great body through the air, landing
squarely upon the shoulders of the priest nearest the revolving arms,
and knocking him flat.
Then the arms caught priest and Drilgo, and the steel hooks dug deep
into their flesh. A screech of terror, a howl that reverberated
through the amphitheatre, and nothing remained of either but a heap
of macerated flesh.
But in that instant Jim had fought free again. He caught Lucille and
dragged her back toward the Atom Smasher.
  *  *  *  *  *
Tode had already broken from his captors and was working at it
frantically.
"Hold on!" screeched old Parrish. "Hold on!"
They had a moment's leeway. The Drilgoes had driven the priests back
into the hooks. With awful shrieks the fanatics were yielding up their
lives, in the place of their selected victims.
But more Drilgoes were pouring up the stairs. A moment's leeway, and
no more, before the savage band would impale the four upon their
stone-pointed spears. There was not the slightest chance that they
would be able to make their identity known.
"For God's sake hurry!" Jim yelled in Tode's ear.
The wheels were revolving, a stream of violet light, leaping out of
the central tunnel, cast a lurid illumination upon the scene.
But it was too late. A score of Drilgoes, with leveled spears, were
rushing on the four.
"Hold tight!" screeched Parrish. He thrust his arm into his breast,
and pulled out a little lever. Jim recognized it and remembered. It
was the instrument of universal death--the uranium release of untold
forces of cataclysmic depredation.
"Take that!" screamed the old man, inserting the lever into the secret
groove in the Atom Smasher and jerking it in the direction of the
priests.
CHAPTER XI
_Tode's Last Gamble_
A roar that seemed to rend the heavens followed. Roar upon roar, as
the infinite momentum of the disintegrating uranium struck obstacle
after obstacle. The Drilgoes vanished, the amphitheatre melted away,
walls and roof.... Overhead were the moon and stars.
And proud Atlantis was sinking into the depths of the sea.... Not as a
ship sinks, but piecemeal, her walls and towers crumbling and toppling
as a child's sand-castle crumbles under the attack of the lapping
waves. Down they crashed, carrying their freight of black, clinging,
human ants, while from the sea's depths a wave, a mile high, rose and
battered the fragments to destruction. From the crater of the volcano
a huge wave of fire fanned forward, and where fire and water met a
cloud of steam rose up.
A boiling chaos in which water and earth and fire were blended, spread
over land and sea. And then suddenly it was ended. Where the last
island of the Atlantean continent had been, only the ocean was to be
seen, placid beneath the stars.
The Atom Smasher was vibrating at tremendous speed. Jim, with one arm
round Lucille, faced Tode at the instrument board. Near by sat
Parrish, watching him too.
"That took a whole year," said Tode. "That pretty little scene of
destruction we've just witnessed. The good old Atom Smasher has been
doing some lively stunts, or we'd have been engulfed too. We're not
likely to see anything so pretty in history again, unless we go to
watch the destruction of Herculaneum and Pompeii by lava from
Vesuvius. But that would be quite tame in comparison with this."
  *  *  *  *  *
Tode's jeering tone grated on Jim's ears immeasurably.
"I don't think any of us are craving any more experiments, Tode," he
said, trying to keep his voice steady. "Suppose you take us back to
Peconic Bay. We'll dump the Atom Smasher into the pond, and try to
forget that we've had anything except a bad nightmare."
"Don't trust him, Jim," whispered Lucille.
Tode heard. "Thank you," he answered, scowling. "But seriously, Dent,
we can't go back with nothing to show for all our trouble. Those fools
tried to betray me, and then the Eye went out. Perhaps I have you to
thank for that performance? However, the sensible thing is to let
bygones be bygones. But we must make a little excursion. How about
picking up a little treasure from the hoards of Solomon or Genghis
Khan? A few pounds of precious stones would make a world of difference
in our social status when we reach Long Island."
Jim felt a cold fury permeating him. Tode saw his grim look and
laughed malignantly.
"Well, Dent, I'm ready to be frank with you," he said. "The game's
still in my hands. I want Lucille. I'm willing to take you and Parrish
back, provided you agree she shall be mine. I'll have to trust you,
but I shall have means of evening up if you play crooked."
"Why don't you ask my girl herself?" piped old Parrish.
"He needn't trouble. He knows the answer!" cried Lucille scornfully.
"There's your answer," said Jim. "Now, what's the alternative?"
"The alternative is, that I have already set the dial to eternity,
Dent," grinned Tode. "Eternity in the fifth dimension. Didn't know I'd
worked that out, did you? A pleasant little surprise. No, don't try to
move. My hand is on the lever. I have only to press it, and we're
there."
  *  *  *  *  *
Jim stood stock still in horror. Tode's voice rang true. He believed
Tode had the power he claimed.
"Yes, the fifth dimension, and eternity," said Tode, "where time and
space reel into functionlessness. Don't ask me what it's like there.
I've never been there. But my impression of it is that it's a fairly
good representation of the place popularly known as hell.
"You fool, Dent," Tode's voice rang out with vicious, snarling
emphasis, "I gave you your chance to come in with me. Together we'd
have made ourselves masters of Atlantis and brought back her plunder
to our Twentieth Century world. You refused because of a girl--a girl,
Dent, who loved me long before you came upon the scene."
"That's a lie, Lucius," answered Lucille steadily. "And you can do
your worst. There's one factor you haven't reckoned in your
calculations, and that's called God."
"The dark blur on the spectral lines," old Parrish muttered.
Tode laughed uproariously. "Come, make your choice, Dent," he mocked.
"It's merely to press this lever. You'll find yourself--well, we won't
go into that. I don't know where you'll find yourself. You'll
disappear. So shall I. But I'm desperate. I must have Lucille.
Choose!" His voice rang out in maniac tones. "Choose, all of you!"
"Lucille has answered you," Jim retorted.
"And how about you, old man?" called Tode to Parrish.
Parrish leased forward, making a swift movement with his hand. "Go to
your own hell, you dev--"
A blinding light, a frantic oscillation of the Atom Smasher, a sense
of death, awful and indescribable--and stark unconsciousness rushed
over Jim. His last thought was that Lucille's arms were about him, and
that he was holding her. Nothing mattered, therefore, even though they
two were plunged into that awful nothingness of the fifth dimension,
where neither space nor time recognizably exists. Love could exist
there.
CHAPTER XII
_Solid Earth_
"He's coming around, Lucille. Thank God for it!"
Jim opened his eyes. For a few moments he looked about him without
understanding. Then the outlines of a room etched themselves against
the clouded background. And in the foreground Lucille's face. The girl
was bending over Jim, one hand soothing his forehead.
"Where am I?" Jim muttered.
"Back on earth, Jim, the good old earth, never again to leave it,"
answered Lucille, with a catch in her voice. With an effort she
composed herself. "You mustn't talk," she said.
"But what place is this?"
"It's Andy Lumm's house. Now rest, and I'll explain everything later."
But the first explanation came from Andy Lumm. "Well, Mr. Dent, my
wife and me sure were glad to be on the spot when you and Miss Parrish
got bogged on the edge of the Black Pool," he said. "Mean, treacherous
place it is. Thar was a cow got mired thar last month, up to her
belly. If us hadn't found her, and dragged her out with ropes, she'd
have gone clear under. Granpop Dawes says thar's underground springs
around the edge, and that it runs straight down to hell, though that
seems sorter far-fetched to me.
"Yessir, and if I hadn't heard WNYC giving Miss Parrish on the list of
missing persons, and as having been seen near here, I reckon I'd never
have found you. Made me and my wife uneasy, that did. 'Andy,' she
says. 'I got an inkling you oughter go to the Vanishing Place and see
if she ain't there.' And there I found you two, mired to the waist,
and Mr. Parrish dancing around and fretting, and his clothes burned to
cinders.
"It sure seems strange to me, to think Mr. Parrish got away safe after
that explosion five years ago, and of his wandering around with loss
of memory, till you found him, and brung him back here to restore it,
but thar's strange things in the world--yes, sir, thar surely is!"
In the happiness of being back on Earth once more, Jim was content to
let further explanations go. The return of Parrish had been duly
chronicled in the newspapers, and had provoked a mild interest, but
fortunately the public mind was so occupied at the moment with the
trial of a night club hostess that, after the first rush of newspaper
men, the three were left alone.
  *  *  *  *  *
Day after day, in the brilliant autumn weather, Jim and Lucille would
roam the tinted woods, recharging themselves with the feel of Earth,
until the memory of those dread experiences grew dim.
"Well, Jim, I reckon I'd better tell you and get it over," said old
Parrish one morning--Parrish, quite his old, jaunty self again. "Tode
had got the dials pointing to the fifth dimension--eternity, he called
it, though actually I believe it's nothing more than annihilation, a
grand smash. Well, he pressed that lever. But something had gone
wrong.
"You remember how poor Cain seemed to take great interest in the Atom
Smasher. There's no way of telling what had been going on in that
brain of his, but it looks to me like he'd known that that lever meant
death. It was sealed up in wax, and Tode had got it free on the way
out of Atlantis.
"Well--this it what I made out from examining the thing afterward.
Cain had been monkeying with the lever. He'd pried loose one of the
wires that hooked to the transformer, and short-circuited it, not
knowing, of course, just what he was doing. The result was that when
Tode pressed that lever, instead of blowing the whole contraption to
pieces, he got a couple of billion volts of electricity through his
body, combined with a larger amperage than has ever been imagined. It
burned him to a few grease spots. He simply--vanished. You don't
remember what you did at the moment, boy?"
"I don't seem to remember anything," said Jim.
"Well, your response was an automatic one. You jumped him. Luckily
you were too late, for Tode vanished like that!" Old Parrish snapped
his fingers. "But you must have got into the field of magnetic
force--any way, you were almost electrocuted. Lucille and I thought
you were dead for hours.
"We laid you down and set a course for home. I used those dial
numberings Tode had given me. He'd said they wouldn't work, but he'd
lied. They did work. They brought us back to the Vanishing Place.
"We carried you out, and then I saw your eyelid twitch. We worked over
you with artificial respiration till it looked as if there was a
chance for you. Then I shut off the power and let the waters rush in
over the Atom Smasher, and swam ashore. And there it lies at the
bottom of the pool, and may it lie there till the Judgment Day."
  *  *  *  *  *
"Tode was a genius," said Jim, "but he never understood that character
counts for more than genius."
"Let's think no more about him," said Lucille. She had come up to
them, and the two looked at each other and smiled. Love is
self-centred; other things it forgets very quickly.
"To-morrow we go back to New York," said Jim. "You think you're able
to face the world and take up life again?"
"I think so, Jim," said Lucille.
"You're not remembering him after all?"
"No, Jim. I was thinking of poor Cain. He died for me."
"But that was twelve thousand years ago, my dear, and to-day's
to-day," said Jim. "And to-morrow a new life begins for you and me."
He drew her closer to him. No, he would never quite forget, but that
was twelve thousand years ago ... and to-morrow was his wedding day.
_A Meeting Place for Readers of_ Astounding Stories
[Illustration: _The Readers' Corner_]
_An "Astounding" Career_
Dear Editor:
 A friend introduced me to your new magazine, and it is
 wonderful. The best story in the magazine, or, rather, the
 one I liked best, outside of the serial, which I didn't
 read, is "The Cave of Horror," by Capt. S. P. Meek. Next
 comes Ray Cummings' story of the Fourth Dimension, "Phantoms
 of Reality." Other good ones are, "Tanks," "Invisible
 Death," and "Compensation."
 I did not like "The Stolen Mind." It seemed to me to be a
 mixture of superstition and magic. A fairy tale. I am glad
 that you are publishing this magazine, and I think that it
 is worth double its present price. You have my good wishes
 to the magazine for a long and astounding career. My way of
 reading a serial is to save copies and to read the story at
 one time. I do not like to wait a month for a story to end
 or continue.
 Your next issue seems to sound quite interesting. "The Spawn
 of the Stars," a very interesting and, I am sure, a fit name
 for the story. "Creatures of the Light" is a very vague
 name--you don't know what to expect. The others will prove
 to be as interesting as any that I have named. I prefer
 interplanetary stories the most, as any amount of science
 can be injected in them.--Nathan Greenfield, 318 East 78th
 St., New York, N. Y.
_Prefers Long Stories_
Dear Editor:
 I got your first issue of Astonishing Stories, and, although
 I like the stories, I do not like the way you have it bound.
 (This is supposed to be criticism, so don't take it to
 heart.) The pages are uneven and hard to turn. But the
 stories in the first copy were good. And you'll have a swell
 magazine if you have stories by Harl Vincent and Ray
 Cummings. The aforesaid men are two of the best in the
 science fiction field. Another thing: don't have any short
 stories. If you have about 3 or 4 l-o-n-g stories, I'd like
 it better. I hope your magazine enjoys much success!--Linus
 Hogenmiller, 502 N. Washington Street, Farmington, Mo.
_Another Who Likes Interplanetary Stories_
Dear Editor:
 I have read the first issue of Astounding Stories with much
 pleasure, and if the first issue is any indication of what
 is to follow I will continue to be a reader.
 You inquire as to the kind of stories that your readers
 think should be published. I think you will find the most
 popular brand to be interplanetary stories and stories along
 the line of the "Beetle Horde." Best wishes for success in
 your new endeavor--F. C. Cowherd, Room 333, L. & N.
 Railroad, Louisville, Ky.
_Attention, Joiners!_
Dear Editor:
 I have just finished one of the stories in your magazine,
 and could not resist the temptation to write and tell you
 how much I enjoyed it. The stories are great and are just
 the thing to give one rest and recreation. At the same time
 they fire imagination and are not trashy love stories.
 The main purpose of the letter is to revive an old idea and
 see if I can put it through. I propose to organize a
 correspondence society for readers interested in science. We
 would use Astounding Stories as our official medium. Each
 member would receive a list of members' names and addresses,
 a quantity of official stationery for inter-correspondence,
 and a certificate of membership suitable for framing.
 The object would be the discussion of scientific topics and
 the latest advances.
 I would suggest an annual fee of $2.50 to cover the cost of
 printing stationery, certificates, application forms, copy
 of the constitution, lists of members and official pins.
 All those interested in the formation of such a society are
 earnestly requested to write me, giving suggestions as to a
 suitable name, etc. They will receive full information, and
 a sample of the certificate of membership and an application
 form.
 I trust you will publish this letter at your earliest
 convenience--M. R. Bercovitch, B. Sc., 4643 St. Urbain
 Street, Montreal, Canada.
_Sound Criticism_
Dear Editor:
 You ask for readers to write you regarding types of stories
 desired. Well, I am an electrical engineer and of course
 like my yarns to have a touch of science in them. Also I
 like my authors to make an original contribution to whatever
 theory of science they develop fictionally. This Ray
 Cummings doesn't do in his very interesting story, "Phantoms
 of Reality." His beginning is palpably borrowed from Francis
 Flagg's story, "The Blue Dimension," which appeared in a
 Science Fiction magazine in 1927. Flagg developed the theory
 of vibrations, reverberation, etc., and contributed
 something new to speculative science. Cummings merely seizes
 this point and dives into a series of improbable adventures.
 Now I am not quarrelling with their improbability: I like my
 stories improbable, but I am asking for something more
 original than the old rehash of kings and queens, intrigues,
 and returning princes, etc. Again, Cummings seems to lack
 enough scientific acumen to make his other world different
 than this. Even a superficial thinker will readily see that
 the terrain of the other world would not faithfully follow
 our own in its salient features. However, forgive me for
 knocking--the story wasn't so bad, and Cummings doubtless
 can do better than this--or has.
 "The Beetle Horde"--so far--is a gem, and holds the
 interest. Furthermore, its science is splendid. I am looking
 forward to its conclusion. "The Cave of Horror" is a damn
 good yarn, well written, interest sustained: but I didn't
 care for "The Stolen Mind." The truth is that that
 particular story didn't hang together very well. It left one
 up in the air, as it were, and far from satisfied me. Too,
 the science involved, to say the least of it, was not very
 sound or plausibly put. In reading the story I felt that the
 author was one who should be encouraged to write
 more--nothing wrong with his imagination or ability to fling
 words--but that he should be gently coerced into writing
 with better continuity and intelligence. "Compensation"
 didn't click--too loose--not compact enough. Splendid idea
 ruined by hasty writing. Another author needing a gentle
 hint. But "Tanks" was another sure-fire hit with me. Held me
 to last word. The story sounded real.
 So for the stories in your first issue. You see, on the
 whole, I liked all of them. Still, I also like variety.
 Can't you give us some of the Francis Flagg type of fiction?
 H. Hyatt Verril is another of my favorites, also Dr. Keller
 and Clara Harris. I have read mighty good tales by those
 authors. I believe you could do worse than to run an
 occasional H. G. Wells story, and if you gave us "The First
 Men in the Moon" serially, I for one would be delighted. I
 have tried in vain to get that story and never have. Well, I
 guess I have said enough. Best wishes for the New Year. May
 Astounding Stories grow and prosper--and its Editor.--C.
 Harry Jaeger, 2900 Jeedan Road, Oakland, California.
_Likes Interplanetary Stories_
Dear Editor:
 Having read the first issue of Astounding Stories, I am
 about to pronounce a sentence on it. It is guilty of being
 "Astounding" to the Nth degree!
 I enjoyed all the stories immensely and will be anxiously
 awaiting the next issue.
 Now as for some suggestions which I think would improve the
 magazine.
 I. Try to have an interplanetary story in each issue.
 II. Publish a number of interesting letters concerning
 Astounding Stories in each issue.
 III. Have several illustrations in long stories.
 I think this would improve the magazine, although it is
 perfect just the way it is.
 Hoping Astounding Stories has a long and successful
 life!--Forrest Ackerman, 530 Staples Avenue, San Francisco,
 Cal.
_Watch the Coming Issues, Miss Miller!_
Dear Editor:
 Saw your new magazine at the newsstand and bought it at
 once. I like the following stories in this issue: "The
 Beetle Horde," "Phantoms of Reality," "The Stolen Mind." I
 did not care much for the others, and least of all for
 "Tanks."
 I believe that readers, like myself, who are interested in
 scientific fantasies, prefer stories of interplanetary
 travels and fourth dimensional stories, and variations of
 these themes. Such as various space-ships and vibration
 machines for visiting other planets and traveling backward
 and forward in time. Stories of lost continents and of
 strange races of people living in unknown places on our own
 Earth are interesting also.
 A magazine of this kind has unlimited possibilities for
 stories of the aforementioned types, and I believe that
 readers who buy magazines of these subjects expect to find
 therein really Astounding Stories. Best wishes for the
 success of your magazine!--Ruth Miller, St. Regis Hotel,
 Cleveland, Ohio.
"_The Scienceers_"
Dear Editor:
 This is to inform you that we have formed a club which we
 named "The Scienceers." The object of this club is to bring
 together members who are interested in science in general,
 also to talk the stories of your magazine over. We have no
 means of reaching those who are interested except through
 your magazine. We hope you will grant us space to print this
 letter in your magazine. We would appreciate it if every
 reader of your magazine living in New York City or nearby
 towns would drop us a card with his name and address. We
 then would be able to send him information of our club. We
 hope you will print this letter, as we are all readers of
 your magazine.--Louis Wexeler, 1933 Woodbine Street,
 Brooklyn, New York.
_We Examine All Science Very Carefully_
Dear Editor:
 In the first edition of your periodical, you invite
 criticism from its readers. I am extremely pleased to note
 that Ray Cummings is among its contributors. His short crisp
 sentences and word pictures are most interesting. As to the
 type of stories, I would not be particular; but there is one
 thing which must be observed: Since this magazine is about
 science every story must be examined to discover any false
 statements by the author concerning present-day science.
 I think that discoveries and inventions to be made in the
 future--by the author, of course--cannot be censored.--James
 Brodent, New York, N. Y.
_Young Mr. Wright Writes In_
Dear Editor:
 I am accepting your offer to write and tell you what kind of
 stories I like. So I did.
 I prefer stories of the Fourth Dimension.
 I hope to find plenty of these fascinating stories in your
 coming issues.--Billy Wright, Age 11, Sheppard Place,
 Nashville, Tenn.
_Likes His Science Fiction_
Dear Editor:
 Allow me to congratulate you on your fine magazine, it being
 one of the seven (more or less) magazines in print that are
 the best on the market.
 I am glad to say that I can't throw you any brickbats, only
 bouquets, and thought I would tell you the kind of stories I
 would like to see in "our" magazine, if I may take the
 liberty of calling it that.
 I like stories of the type A. Merritt and Edgar Rice
 Burroughs write, particularly A. Merritt, and if you could
 reprint "Through the Dragon Glass," by A. Merritt, I wish
 you would, and give it a cover illustration, as I have
 everything by him except that one. Please give it a cover
 illustration as well as any by Merritt and Burroughs you
 ever print.
 You certainly have a good title, and in my opinion the
 magazine need not be changed one iota, except perhaps you
 might have the background a different color every month;
 that is, the background of the cover, using every color in
 the solar spectrum, which might make it sell better, and, at
 any rate, would make a nice looking magazine in my opinion.
 Everything in Science Fiction that comes out I have to get,
 and pretty soon I will have so much that I will probably
 have to pay storage space for it. I have a pretty good
 amount now; four stacks two feet high each, but I can't
 resist it and will keep on buying as long as there is
 anything in that line to buy, and as long as I can.
 Put this in the proverbial waste-basket if you don't want to
 print it, as that is probably its ultimate destination
 anyway, as my ideas are not worth much or less than that.
 But I do wish you would read it through and act on my
 suggestions soon.
 Thanks--from an ardent devourer of Science Fiction, who
 reads everything in that line he can get his hands on, your
 and our magazine being one of the best in that line.--Worth
 K. Bryant, 406 North Third Street, Yakima, Washington.
"_A Great Magazine_"
Dear Editor:
 I have just come across a copy of your new magazine
 Astounding Stories, and to say that it is a great magazine
 is putting it mild. I enjoy stories of the distant future.
 The first instalment of "The Beetle Horde" by Victor
 Rousseau was great. I hope to hear more of this author in
 coming issues. I would like to see stories by such authors
 as Edgar Rice Burroughs, Harl Vincent, Otis Adelbert Kline,
 Garret Smith, also Ray Cummings. I wish Astounding Stories a
 long life.--Wilbert Moyer, 533 N. 7th Street, Allentown, Pa.
_Mr. Anderson's Favorites_
Dear Editor:
 Just a word referring to your "What kind of stories do you
 like?" in Astounding Stories. I like stories with some facts
 based on true science of to-day, but let the author's
 imagination wander a little, because anything might be
 possible to-morrow. I do not like love stories or much humor
 in this type of stories.
 Stories of other worlds or of the Fourth Dimension always
 interest me, because there is no limit to the imagination
 there.
 Why not have a discussion column and print some of the
 letters? It would encourage more to write, and give you
 their opinion: and, whether good or bad, should help you
 please the majority.
 Some will maybe say the cover is too vivid--but that was
 what attracted my eye when I picked it out from among many
 others.
 Most of your stories in the first edition were good. I liked
 "The Beetle Horde" and "Phantoms of Reality" best. Also
 noticed the "Spawn of the Stars" next issue, which sounds O.
 K. Hoping you all success in this type of stories.--C. E.
 Anderson, 3504 Colfax Avenue, Minneapolis, Minn.
_A Young Reader's Favorites_
Dear Editor:
 I am writing you, per your request in your first issue of
 Astounding Stories. They are most entertaining. I have read
 three of the stories and they are excellent. You asked the
 readers to tell you the kind of stories we liked best. I
 like stories that concern the future of aviation. I like
 interplanetary stories, also the stories about the Fourth
 Dimension. I like Cummings', Rousseau's, Leinster's Meek's,
 Vincent's and Starzl's writing. Your magazine is sure worth
 twenty cents. You could put more science in your stories.
 Please hold H. Wesso, your artist. He can really draw. I
 have seen his drawings in other magazines. And you may
 console yourself with the thought that you have one
 continuous reader. I feel that your magazine is going to be
 a success. I am also expressing the thoughts of other
 readers. I am only 15 years old, but I like to read good
 science stories, nevertheless. I hope to see you in next
 month's magazine.--Ward Elmore, 2912 Avenue J. Ft. Madison,
 Iowa.
_A Contented Reader_
Dear Editor:
 Congratulations on your new publication, Astounding Stories.
 I certainly enjoyed reading the January issue. I believe
 that this magazine is the answer to the prayer of those
 readers who are desirous of something different, something
 unique. Another feature is that you are charging only 20¢ a
 copy for a magazine that is really worth several times that
 amount. You may count on me as a steady buyer of the
 Astounding Stories as long as future issues are up to the
 standard of the January issue.
 Let me urge you that you give us the magazine on time every
 month. I do not want to postpone my enjoyment of reading the
 Unique Magazine on the first Thursday of each month.
 Keep up the good work, and remember me as a contented
 reader of your publication--T. J. Creaff, Jr. P. O. Box 734,
 Phoenix Arizona.
"_A Lallapaloozer_"!
Dear Editor:
 Well, I've got to say something, and I might as well get it
 over with. Your new magazine, Astounding Stories, is a
 Lallapaloozer. I'm sorry I didn't get the first edition of
 the new magazine, but I suppose you have some in stock and
 I'm sending in my twenty cents in stamps to get one. I might
 as well tell you how I found out about this new wonder.
 One dreary, dreary night I walked into my newsdealer's store
 to get a paper. While there I happened to glance upon the
 bookstand--I saw the word Astounding and, my curiosity
 aroused, I walked over to the stand and pulled the magazine
 out. Imagine my surprise and delight when I found out what
 it was! Well, I bought the book then and there without even
 taking a look inside. When I got home I opened the book, and
 the first story that caught my eye was "Old Crompton's
 Secret," by Harl Vincent. I knew the story was good before I
 read it, because I've read quite a few of Mr. Vincent's
 novels and they were all excellent. The best stories I like
 are interplanetary stories.
 Why not have a "Reader Talks" in Astounding Stories, where
 each reader gives his point of view on the stories in the
 magazine? I know everyone would enjoy that, as it gives the
 readers a chance to comment on stories and, also, see what
 the other reader thinks about any story in particular.
 I wish you success in your new enterprise and hope my first
 edition of Astounding Stories arrives soon.--Joseph
 Kankowsky, 35 Columbia Street, West Orange, New Jersey.
"_The Readers' Corner_"
All Readers are extended a sincere and cordial invitation to "come
over in 'The Readers' Corner'" and join in our monthly discussion of
stories, authors, scientific principles and possibilities--everything
that's of common interest in connection with our Astounding Stories.
Although from time to time the Editor may make a comment or so, this
is a department primarily for Readers, and we want you to make full
use of it. Likes, dislikes, criticisms, explanations, roses,
brickbats, suggestions--everything's welcome here: so "come over in
'The Readers' Corner'" and discuss it with all of us!
--_The Editor.
