Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
  _When we published Carl Jacobi's last story we had no assurance he
  would be with us so soon again. For when a uniquely gifted
  science-fantasy writer becomes radio-active on the entertainment
  meter and goes voyaging into the unknown, he may be gone from the
  world we know for as long as yesterday's tomorrow. But Carl Jacobi
  has not only returned almost with the speed of light--he has brought
  with him shining new nuggets of wonder and surmise._
  the
  long
 voyage
 _by ... Carl Jacobi_
 The secret lay hidden at the end of nine landings,
 and Medusa-dark was one man's search for it--in
 the strangest journey ever made.
A soft gentle rain began to fall as we emerged from the dark woods and
came out onto the shore. There it was, the sea, stretching as far as the
eye could reach, gray and sullen, and flecked with green-white froth.
The blue _hensorr_ trees, crowding close to the water's edge, were bent
backward as if frightened by the bleakness before them. The sand,
visible under the clear patches of water, was a bleached white like the
exposed surface of a huge bone.
We stood there a moment in silence. Then Mason cleared his throat
huskily.
"Well, here goes," he said. "We'll soon see if we have any friends
about."
He unslung the packsack from his shoulders, removed its protective outer
shield and began to assemble the organic surveyor, an egg-shaped ball of
white carponium secured to a segmented forty-foot rod. While Brandt and
I raised the rod with the aid of an electric fulcrum, Mason carefully
placed his control cabinet on a piece of outcropping rock and made a
last adjustment.
The moment had come. Even above the sound of the sea, you could hear
the strained breathing of the men. Only Navigator Norris appeared
unconcerned. He stood there calmly smoking his pipe, his keen blue eyes
squinting against the biting wind.
Mason switched on the speaker. Its high-frequency scream rose
deafeningly above us and was torn away in unsteady gusts. He began to
turn its center dial, at first a quarter circle, and then all the way to
the final backstop of the calibration. All that resulted was a
continuation of that mournful ululation like a wail out of eternity.
Mason tried again. With stiff wrists he tuned while perspiration stood
out on his forehead, and the rest of us crowded close.
"It's no use," he said. "This pickup failure proves there isn't a
vestige of animal life on Stragella--on this hemisphere of the planet,
at least."
Navigator Norris took his pipe from his mouth and nodded. His face was
expressionless. There was no indication in the man's voice that he had
suffered another great disappointment, his sixth in less than a year.
"We'll go back now," he said, "and we'll try again. There must be some
planet in this system that's inhabited. But it's going to be hard to
tell the women."
Mason let the surveyor rod down with a crash. I could see the anger and
resentment that was gathering in his eyes. Mason was the youngest of our
party and the leader of the antagonistic group that was slowly but
steadily undermining the authority of the Navigator.
This was our seventh exploratory trip after our sixth landing since
entering the field of the sun Ponthis. Ponthis with its sixteen
equal-sized planets, each with a single satellite. First there had been
Coulora; then in swift succession, Jama, Tenethon, Mokrell, and R-9. And
now Stragella. Strange names of strange worlds, revolving about a
strange star.
It was Navigator Norris who told us the names of these planets and
traced their positions on a chart for us. He alone of our group was
familiar with astrogation and cosmography. He alone had sailed the
spaceways in the days before the automatic pilots were installed and
locked and sealed on every ship.
A handsome man in his fortieth year, he stood six feet three with broad
shoulders and a powerful frame. His eyes were the eyes of a scholar,
dreamy yet alive with depth and penetration. I had never seen him lose
his temper, and he governed our company with an iron hand.
He was not perfect, of course. Like all Earthmen, he had his faults.
Months before he had joined with that famed Martian scientist,
Ganeth-Klae, to invent that all-use material, _Indurate_, the formula
for which had been stolen and which therefore had never appeared on the
commercial market. Norris would talk about that for hours. If you
inadvertently started him on the subject a queer glint would enter his
eyes, and he would dig around in his pocket for a chunk of the black
substance.
"Did I ever show you a piece of this?" he would say. "Look at it
carefully. Notice the smooth grainless texture--hard and yet not
brittle. You wouldn't think that it was formed in a gaseous state, then
changed to a liquid and finally to a clay-like material that could be
worked with ease. A thousand years after your body has returned to dust,
that piece of _Indurate_ will still exist, unchanged, unworn. Erosion
will have little effect upon it. Beside it granite, steel are nothing.
If only I had the formula ..."
But he had only half the formula, the half he himself had developed. The
other part was locked in the brain of Ganeth-Klae, and Ganeth-Klae had
disappeared. What had become of him was a mystery. Norris perhaps had
felt the loss more than any one, and he had offered the major part of
his savings as a reward for information leading to the scientist's
whereabouts.
Our party--eighteen couples and Navigator Norris--had gathered together
and subsequently left Earth in answer to a curious advertisement that
had appeared in the Sunday edition of the London _Times_.
  WANTED: _A group of married men and women, young, courageous,
  educated, tired of political and social restrictions, interested
  in extra-terrestrial colonization. Financial resources no
  qualification._
After we had been weeded out, interviewed and rigorously questioned,
Norris had taken us into the hangar, waved a hand toward the _Marie
Galante_ and explained the details.
The _Marie Galante_ was a cruiser-type ship, stripped down to essentials
to maintain speed, but equipped with the latest of everything. For a
short run to Venus, for which it was originally built, it would
accommodate a passenger list of ninety.
But Norris wasn't interested in that kind of run. He had knocked out
bulkheads, reconverted music room and ballroom into living quarters. He
had closed and sealed all observation ports, so that only in the bridge
cuddy could one see into space.
"We shall travel beyond the orbit of the sun," he said. "There will be
no turning back; for the search for a new world, a new life, is not a
task for cowards."
Aside to me, he said: "You're to be the physician of this party, Bagley.
So I'm going to tell you what to expect when we take off. We're going to
have some mighty sick passengers aboard then."
"What do you mean, sir?" I said.
He pointed with his pipe toward the stern of the vessel. "See that ...
well, call it a booster. Ganeth-Klae designed it just before he
disappeared, using the last lot of _Indurate_ in existence. It will
increase our take-off speed by five times, and it will probably have a
bad effect on the passengers."
So we had left Earth, at night from a field out in Essex. Without
orders, without clearance papers, without an automatic pilot check.
Eighteen couples and one navigator--destination unknown. If the
Interstellar Council had known what Norris was up to, it would have been
a case for the Space-Time Commission.
Of that long initial lap of our voyage, perhaps the less said the
better. As always is the case when monotony begins to wear away the
veneer of civilization, character quirks came to the surface, cliques
formed among the passengers, and gossip and personalities became matters
of pre-eminent importance.
Rising to the foreground out of our thirty-six, came Fielding Mason,
tall, taciturn, and handsome, with a keen intellect and a sense of
values remarkable in so young a man. Mason was a graduate of Montape,
the French outgrowth of St. Cyr. But he had majored in military tactics,
psychology and sociology and knew nothing at all about astrogation or
even elemental astronomy. He too was a man of good breeding and
refinement. Nevertheless conflict began to develop between him and
Navigator Norris. That conflict began the day we landed on Coulora.
Norris stepped out of the air lock into the cold thin air, glanced
briefly about him and faced the eighteen men assembled.
"We'll divide into three groups," he said. "Each group to carry an
organic surveyor and take a different direction. Each group will so
regulate its marching as to be back here without fail an hour before
darkness sets in. If you find no sign of animal life, then we will take
off again immediately on your return."
Mason paused halfway in the act of strapping on his packsack.
"What's that got to do with it?" he demanded. "There's vegetation here.
That's all that seems to be necessary."
Norris lit his pipe. "If you find no sign of animal life we will take
off immediately on your return," he said as if he hadn't heard.
But the strangeness of Coulora tempered bad feelings then. The blue
_hensorr_ trees were actually not trees at all but a huge cat-tail-like
growth, the stalks of which were quite transparent. In between the
stalks grew curious cabbage-like plants that changed from red to yellow
as an intruder approached and back to red again after he had passed.
Rock outcroppings were everywhere, but all were eroded and in places
polished smooth as glass.
There was a strange kind of dust that acted as though endowed with life.
It quivered when trod upon, and the outline of our footsteps slowly
rose into the air, so that looking back I could see our trail floating
behind us in irregular layers.
Above us the star that was this planet's sun shown bright but faintly
red as if it were in the first stages of dying. The air though thin was
fit to breathe, and we found it unnecessary to wear space suits. We
marched down the corridors of _hensorr_ trees, until we came to an open
spot, a kind of glade. And that was the first time Mason tuned his
organic surveyor and received absolutely nothing.
There was no animal life on Coulora!
  *  *  *  *  *
Within an hour we had blasted off again. The forward-impact delivered by
the Ganeth-Klae booster was terrific, and nausea and vertigo struck us
all simultaneously. But again, with all ports and observation shields
sealed shut, Norris held the secret of our destination.
On July twenty-second, the ship gave that sickening lurch and came once
again to a standstill.
"Same procedure as before," Norris said, stepping out of the airlock.
"Those of you who desire to have their wives accompany you may do so.
Mason, you'll make a final correlation on the organic surveyors. If
there is no trace of animal life return here before dark."
Once our group was out of sight of the ship, Mason threw down his
packsack, sat down on a boulder and lighted a cigarette.
"Bagley," he said to me, "has the Old Man gone loco?"
"I think not," I said, frowning. "He's one of the most evenly balanced
persons I know."
"Then he's hiding something," Mason said. "Why else should he be so
concerned with finding animal life?"
"You know the answer to that," I said. "We're here to colonize, to start
a new life. We can't very well do that on a desert."
"That's poppycock," Mason replied, flinging away his cigarette. "When
the Albertson expedition first landed on Mars, there was no animal life
on the red planet. Now look at it. Same thing was true when Breslauer
first settled Pluto. The colonies there got along. I tell you Norris has
got something up his sleeve, and I don't like it."
Later, after Mason had taken his negative surveyor reading, the flame of
trouble reached the end of its fuse!
Norris had given orders to return to the _Marie Galante_, and the rest
of us were sullenly making ready to start the back trail. Mason,
however, deliberately seized his pick and began chopping a hole in the
rock surface, preparatory apparently to erecting his plastic tent.
"We'll make temporary camp here," he said calmly. "Brandt, you can go
back to the ship and bring back the rest of the women." He turned and
smiled sardonically at Navigator Norris.
Norris quietly knocked the ashes from his pipe and placed it in his
pocket. He strode forward, took the pick from Mason's hands and flung it
away. Then he seized Mason by the coat, whipped him around and drove his
fist hard against the younger man's jaw.
"When you signed on for this voyage, you agreed to obey my orders," he
said, not raising his voice. "You'll do just that."
Mason picked himself up, and there was an ugly glint in his eyes. He
could have smashed Norris to a pulp, and none knew it better than the
Navigator. For a brief instant the younger man swayed there on the balls
of his feet, fists clenched. Then he let his hands drop, walked over and
began to put on his packsack.
But I had seen Mason's face, and I knew he had not given in as easily as
it appeared. Meanwhile he began to circulate among the passengers,
making no offers, yet subtly enlisting backers for a policy, the
significance of which grew on me slowly. It was mutiny he was plotting!
And with his personal charm and magnetism he had little trouble in
winning over converts. I came upon him arguing before a group of the
women one day, among them his own wife, Estelle. He was standing close
to her.
"We have clothing and equipment and food concentrate," Mason said.
"Enough to last two generations. We have brains and intelligence, and we
certainly should be able to establish ourselves without the aid of other
vertebrate forms of life.
"Coulora, Jama, Tenethon, Mokrell, R-9, and Stragella. We could have
settled on any one of those planets, and apparently we should have, for
conditions have grown steadily worse at each landing. But always the
answer is no. Why? Because Norris says we must go on until we find
animal life."
He cleared his throat and gazed at the feminine faces before him. "Go
where? What makes Norris so sure he'll find life on any planet in this
system? And incidentally where in the cosmos is this system?"
One of the women, a tall blonde, stirred uneasily. "What do you mean?"
she said.
"I mean we don't know if our last landing was on Stragella or Coulora. I
mean we don't know where we are or where we're going, and I don't think
Norris does either. _We're lost!_"
That was in August. By the last of September we had landed on two more
planets, to which Norris gave the simple names of R-12 and R-14. Each
had crude forms of vegetable life, represented principally by the blue
_hensorr_ trees, but in neither case did the organic surveyor reveal the
slightest traces of animal life.
There was, however, a considerable difference in physical appearance
between R-12 and R-14, and for a time that fact excited Norris
tremendously. Up to then, each successive planet, although similar in
size, had exhibited signs of greater age than its predecessor. But on
R-12 there were definite manifestations of younger geologic development.
Several pieces of shale lay exposed under a fold of igneous rock. Two of
those pieces contained fossils of highly developed _ganoids_, similar to
those found on Venus. They were perfectly preserved.
It meant that animal life had existed on R-12, even if it didn't now. It
meant that R-12, though a much older planet than Earth, was still
younger than Stragella or the rest.
For a while Norris was almost beside himself. He cut out rock samples
and carried them back to the ship. He personally supervised the tuning
of the surveyors. And when he finally gave orders to take off, he was
almost friendly to Mason, whereas before his attitude toward him had
been one of cold aloofness.
But when we reached R-14, our eighth landing, all that passed. For R-14
was old again, older than any of the others.
And then, on October sixteenth, Mason opened the door of the locked
cabin. It happened quite by accident. One of the _arelium-thaxide_
conduits broke in the _Marie Galante's_ central passageway, and the
resulting explosion grounded the central feed line of the instrument
equipment. In a trice the passageway was a sheet of flame, rapidly
filling with smoke from burning insulation.
Norris, of course, was in the bridge cuddy with locked doors between us
and him, and now with the wiring burned through there was no way of
signalling him he was wanted for an emergency. In his absence Mason took
command.
That passageway ran the full length of the ship. Midway down it was the
door leading to the women's lounge. The explosion had jammed that door
shut, and smoke was pouring forth from under the sill. All at once one
of the women rushed forward to announce hysterically that Mason's wife,
Estelle, was in the lounge.
Adjoining the lounge was a small cabin which since the beginning of our
voyage had remained locked. Norris had given strict orders that that
cabin was not to be disturbed. We all had taken it as a matter of course
that it contained various kinds of precision instruments.
Now, however, Mason realized that the only way into the lounge was by
way of that locked cabin. If he used a heat blaster on the lounge door
there was no telling what would happen to the woman inside.
He ripped the emergency blaster from its wall mounting, pressed it to
the magnetic latch of the sealed cabin door and pressed the stud. An
instant later he was leading his frightened wife, Estelle, out through
the smoke.
The fire was quickly extinguished after that and the wiring spliced.
Then when the others had drifted off, Mason called Brandt and me aside.
"We've been wondering for a long time what happened to Ganeth-Klae, the
Martian inventor who worked with Norris to invent _Indurate_," he said
very quietly. "Well, we don't need to wonder any more. He's in there."
Brandt and I stepped forward over the sill--and drew up short.
Ganeth-Klae was there all right, but he would never trouble himself
about making a voyage in a locked cabin. His rigid body was encased in a
transparent block of amber-colored solidifex, the after-death
preservative used by all Martians.
Both of us recognized his still features at once, and in addition his
name-tattoo, required by Martian law, was clearly visible on his left
forearm.
  *  *  *  *  *
For a brief instant the discovery stunned us. Klae dead? Klae whose IQ
had become a measuring guide for the entire system, whose Martian head
held more ordinary horse sense, in addition to radical postulations on
theoretical physics, than anyone on the planets. It wasn't possible.
And what was the significance of his body on Norris' ship? Why had
Norris kept its presence a secret and why had he given out the story of
Klae's disappearance?
Mason's face was cold as ice. "Come with me, you two," he said. "We're
going to get the answer to this right now."
We went along the passage to the circular staircase. We climbed the
steps, passed through the scuttle and came to the door of the bridge
cuddy. Mason drew the bar and we passed in. Norris was bent over the
chart table. He looked up sharply at the sound of our steps.
"What is the meaning of this intrusion?" he said.
It didn't take Mason long to explain. When he had finished, he stood
there, jaw set, eyes smouldering.
Norris paled. Then quickly he got control of himself, and his old bland
smile returned.
"I expected you to blunder into Klae's body one of these days," he said.
"The explanation is quite simple. Klae had been ill for many months, and
he knew his time was up. His one desire in life was to go on this
expedition with me, and he made me promise to bury him at the site of
our new colony. The pact was between him and me, and I've followed it to
the letter, telling no one."
Mason's lips curled in a sneer. "And just what makes you think we're
going to believe that story?" he demanded.
Norris lit a cigar. "It's entirely immaterial to me whether you believe
it or not."
But the story was believed, especially by the women, to whom the
romantic angle appealed and Mason's embryonic mutiny died without being
born, and the _Marie Galante_ sailed on through uncharted space toward
her ninth and last landing.
As the days dragged by and no word came from the bridge cuddy,
restlessness began to grow amongst us. Rumor succeeded rumor, each story
wilder and more incredible than the rest. Then just as the tension had
mounted to fever pitch, there came the sickening lurch and grinding
vibration of another landing.
Norris dispensed with his usual talk before marching out from the ship.
After testing the atmosphere with the ozonometer, he passed out the heat
pistols and distributed the various instruments for computing
radioactivity and cosmic radiation.
"This is the planet Nizar," he said shortly. "Largest in the field of
the sun Ponthis. You will make your survey as one group this time. I
will remain here."
He stood watching us as we marched off down the cliff side. Then the
blue _hensorr_ trees rose up to swallow him from view. Mason swung along
at the head of our column, eyes bright, a figure of aggressive action.
We had gone but a hundred yards when it became apparent that, as a
planet, Nizar was entirely different from its predecessors. There was
considerable top soil, and here grew a tall reed-shaped plant that gave
off varying chords of sound when the wind blew.
It was as if we were progressing through the nave of a mighty church
with a muted organ in the distance. There was animal life too, a strange
lizard-like bird that rose up in flocks ahead of us and flew screaming
overhead.
"I don't exactly like it, Bagley," he said. "There's something
unwholesome about this planet. The evolution is obviously in an early
state of development, but I get the impression that it has gone
backward; that the planet is really old and has reverted to its earlier
life."
Above us the sky was heavily overcast, and a tenuous white mist rising
up from the _hensorr_ trees formed curious shapes and designs. In the
distance I could hear the swashing of waves on a beach.
Suddenly Mason stopped. "Look!" he said.
Below us stretched the shore of a great sea. But it was the structure
rising up from that shore that drew a sharp exclamation from me. Shaped
in a rough ellipse, yet mounted high toward a common point, was a large
building of multiple hues and colors. The upper portion was eroded to
crumbling ruins, the lower part studded with many bas-reliefs and
triangular doorways.
"Let's go," Mason said, breaking out into a fast loping run.
The building was farther away than we had thought, but when we finally
came up to it, we saw that it was even more of a ruin than it had at
first appeared. It was only a shell with but two walls standing, alone
and forlorn. Whatever race had lived here, they had come and gone.
We prowled about the ruins for more than an hour. The carvings on the
walls were in the form of geometric designs and cabalistic symbols,
giving no clue to the city's former occupants' identity.
And then Mason found the stairs leading to the lower crypts. He switched
on his ato-flash and led the way down cautiously. Level one ... level
two ... three ... we descended lower and lower. Here water from the
nearby sea oozed in little rivulets that glittered in the light of the
flash.
We emerged at length on a wide underground plaisance, a kind of
amphitheater, with tier on tier of seats surrounding it and extending
back into the shadows.
"Judging from what we've seen," Mason said, "I would say that the race
that built this place had reached approximately a grade C-5 of
civilization, according to the Mokart scale. This apparently was their
council chamber."
"What are those rectangular stone blocks depending from the ceiling?" I
said.
Mason turned the light beam upward. "I don't know," he said. "But my
guess is that they are burial vaults. Perhaps the creatures were
ornithoid."
Away from the flash the floor of the plaisance appeared to be a great
mirror that caught our reflections and distorted them fantastically and
horribly. We saw then that it was a form of living mold, composed of
millions of tiny plants, each with an eye-like iris at its center. Those
eyes seemed to be watching us, and as we strode forward, a great sigh
rose up, as if in resentment at our intrusion.
There was a small triangular dais in the center of the chamber, and in
the middle of it stood an irregular black object. As we drew nearer, I
saw that it had been carved roughly in the shape of this central
building and that it was in a perfect state of preservation.
Mason walked around this carving several times, examining it curiously.
"Odd," he said. "It looks to be an object of religious veneration, but I
never heard before of a race worshipping a replica of their own living
quarters."
Suddenly his voice died off. He bent closer to the black stone, studying
it in the light of the powerful ato-flash. He got a small magnifying
glass out of his pocket and focused it on one of the miniature
bas-reliefs midway toward the top of the stone. Unfastening his geologic
hammer from his belt, he managed, with a sharp, swinging blow, to break
off a small protruding piece.
He drew in his breath sharply, and I saw his face go pale. I stared at
him in alarm.
"What's wrong?" I asked.
He motioned that I follow and led the way silently past the others
toward the stair shaft. Climbing to the top level was a heart-pounding
task, but Mason almost ran up those steps. At the surface he leaned
against a pillar, his lips quivering spasmodically.
"Tell me I'm sane, Bagley," he said huskily. "Or rather, don't say
anything until we've seen Norris. Come on. We've got to see Norris."
  *  *  *  *  *
All the way back to the _Marie Galante_, I sought to soothe him, but he
was a man possessed. He rushed up the ship's gangway, burst into central
quarters and drew up before Navigator Norris like a runner stopping at
the tape.
"You damned lying hypocrite!" he yelled.
Norris looked at him in his quiet way. "Take it easy, Mason," he said.
"Sit down and explain yourself."
But Mason didn't sit down. He thrust his hand in his pocket, pulled out
the piece of black stone he had chipped off the image in the cavern and
handed it to Norris.
"Take a look at that!" he demanded.
Norris took the stone, glanced at it and laid it down on his desk. His
face was emotionless. "I expected this sooner or later," he said. "Yes,
it's _Indurate_ all right. Is that what you want me to say?"
There was a dangerous fanatical glint in Mason's eyes now. With a sudden
quick motion he pulled out his heat pistol.
"So you tricked us!" he snarled. "Why? I want to know why."
I stepped forward and seized Mason's gun hand. "Don't be a fool," I
said. "It can't be that important."
Mason threw back his head and burst into an hysterical peal of laughter.
"Important!" he cried. "Tell him how important it is, Norris. _Tell
him._"
Quietly the Navigator filled and lighted his pipe. "I'm afraid Mason is
right," he said. "I did trick you. Not purposely, however. And in the
beginning I had no intention of telling anything but the truth. Actually
we're here because of a dead man's vengeance."
Norris took his pipe from his lips and stared at it absently.
"You'll remember that Ganeth-Klae, the Martian, and I worked together to
invent _Indurate_. But whereas I was interested in the commercial
aspects of that product, Klae was absorbed only in the experimental
angle of it. He had some crazy idea that it should not be given to the
general public at once, but rather should be allocated for the first few
years to a select group of scientific organizations. You see, _Indurate_
was such a departure from all known materials that Ganeth-Klae feared it
would be utilized for military purposes.
"I took him for a dreamer and a fool. Actually he was neither. How was I
to know that his keen penetrating brain had seen through my motive to
get control of all commercial marketing of _Indurate_? I had laid my
plans carefully, and I had expected to reap a nice harvest. Klae must
have been aware of my innermost thoughts, but Martian-like he said
nothing."
Norris paused to wet his lips and lean against the desk. "I didn't kill
Ganeth-Klae," he continued, "though I suppose in a court of law I would
be judged responsible for his death. The manufacture of _Indurate_
required some ticklish work. As you know, we produced our halves of the
formula separately. Physical contact with my half over a long period of
time would prove fatal, I knew, and I simply neglected to so inform
Ganeth-Klae.
"But his ultimate death was a boomerang. With Klae gone, I could find no
trace of his half of the formula. I was almost beside myself for a time.
Then I thought of something. Klae had once said that the secret of his
half of the formula lay in himself. A vague statement, to say the least.
But I took the words at their face value and gambled that he meant them
literally; that is, that his body itself contained the formula.
"I tried everything: X-ray, chemical analysis of the skin. I even
removed the cranial cap and examined the brain microscopically. All
without result. Meanwhile the police were beginning to direct their
suspicions toward me in the matter of Klae's disappearance.
"You know the rest. It was necessary that I leave Earth at once and go
beyond our system, beyond the jurisdiction of the planetary police. So I
arranged this voyage with a sufficient complement of passengers to
lessen the danger and hardship of a new life on a new world. I was still
positive, however, that Klae's secret lay in his dead body. I took that
body along, encased in the Martian preservative, solidifex.
"It was my idea that I could continue my examination once we were safe
on a strange planet But I had reckoned without Ganeth-Klae."
"What do you mean?" I said slowly.
"I said Klae was no fool. But I didn't know that with Martian stoicism
he suspected the worst and took his own ironic means of combating it. He
used the last lot of _Indurate_ to make that booster, a device which he
said would increase our take-off speed. He mounted it on the _Marie
Galante_.
"Mason, that device was no booster. It was a time machine, so devised as
to catapult the ship not into outer space, but into the space-time
continuum. It was a mechanism designed to throw the _Marie Galante_
forward into the future."
A cloud of fear began to well over me. "What do you mean?" I said again.
Navigator Norris paced around his desk. "_I mean that the_ Marie Galante
_has not once left Earth, has not in fact left the spot of its moorings
but has merely gone forward in time. I mean that the nine 'landings' we
made were not stops on some other planets but halting stages of a
journey into the future._"
Had a bombshell burst over my head the effect could have been no
greater. Cold perspiration began to ooze out on my forehead. In a flash
I saw the significance of the entire situation. That was why Norris had
been so insistent that we always return to the ship before dark. He
didn't want us to see the night sky and the constellations there for
fear we would guess the truth. That was why he had never permitted any
of us in the bridge cuddy and why he had kept all ports and observation
shields closed.
"But the names of the planets ... Coulora, Stragella, and the others and
their positions on the chart...?" I objected.
Norris smiled grimly. "All words created out of my imagination. Like the
rest of you, I knew nothing of the true action of the booster. It was
only gradually that truth dawned on me. But by the time we had made our
first 'landing' I had guessed. That was why I demanded we always take
organic surveyor readings. I knew we had traveled far into future time,
far beyond the life period of man on Earth. But I wasn't sure how far we
had gone, and I lived with the hope that Klae's booster might reverse
itself and start carrying us backwards down the centuries."
For a long time I stood there in silence, a thousand mad speculations
racing through my mind.
"How about that piece of _Indurate_?" I said at length. "It was chipped
off an image in the ruins of a great building a mile or so from here."
"An image?" repeated Norris. A faint glow of interest slowly rose in his
eyes. Then it died. "I don't know," he said. "It would seem to
presuppose that the formula, both parts of it, was known by Klae and
that he left it for posterity to discover."
All this time Mason had been standing there, eyes smouldering, lips an
ugly line. Now abruptly he took a step forward.
"I've wanted to return this for a long time," he said.
He doubled back his arm and brought his fist smashing onto Norris' jaw.
The Navigator's head snapped backward; he gave a low groan and slumped
to the floor.
And that is where, by all logic, this tale should end. But, as you may
have guessed, there is an anticlimax--what story-tellers call a happy
conclusion.
Mason, Brandt, and I worked, and worked alone, on the theory that the
secret of the _Indurate_ formula would be the answer to our return down
the time trail. We removed the body of Ganeth-Klae from its solidifex
envelope and treated it with every chemical process we knew. By sheer
luck the fortieth trial worked. A paste of carbo-genethon mixed with
the crushed seeds of the Martian iron-flower was spread over Klae's
chest and abdomen.
And there, in easily decipherable code, was not only the formula, but
the working principles of the ship's booster--or rather, time-catapult.
After that, it was a simple matter to reverse the principle and throw us
backward in the time stream.
We are heading back as I write these lines. If they reach print and you
read them, it will mean our escape was successful and that we returned
to our proper slot in the epilogue of human events.
There remains, however, one matter to trouble me. Navigator Norris. I
like the man. I like him tremendously, in spite of his cold-blooded
confession, and past record. He must be punished, of course. But I, for
one, would hate to see him given the death penalty. It is a serious
problem.
Transcriber's Note:
  This etext was produced from _Fantastic Universe_ September 1955.
  Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
  copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
  typographical errors have been corrected without note.