THE UNTOUCHABLE
By STEPHEN A. KALLIS, JR.
Illustrated by Douglas
_"You can see it--you can watch it--but mustn't touch!" And what could
possibly be more frustrating ... when you need, most violently, to get
your hands on it for just one second...._
The man finally entered the office of General George Garvers. As the
door closed behind him, he saw the general, who sprang from his chair to
greet him.
"Max! You finally came."
"Got here as soon as I could. I wager half my time was taken up by the
security check points. You are certainly isolated in here."
"All of that," agreed the general. "Have a seat, won't you?" he asked,
indicating a chair.
His friend sank into it gratefully. "Now, what's this vital problem you
called me about? You weren't too specific."
"No," said Garvers, "I wasn't. This is a security matter, after a
fashion. It's vitally important that we get technical help on this
thing, and since you and I are friends, I was asked to call you in."
"Well?"
"I'm afraid I'll have to make a story of it."
"Quite all right by me, but don't mind if I interject a question now and
then. Mind if I smoke?"
"Go right ahead," said Garvers, fumbling out a lighter. "Just don't
spill ashes on the rug.
"This all began on the Third of May. I was working here on some
top-security stuff. I had suddenly got the feeling of being watched. I
know it seems silly, what with all the check points that a potential spy
would have to go through to get here, but that's just how I felt.
"Several times I glanced around the office, but of course it was empty.
Then I began to think that it was my nerves."
"You always were a bit of a hypochondriac," observed his friend.
"Be that as it may," continued Garvers, "it was the only explanation I
had at the time. Either someone was watching me, which seemed
impossible, or I was beginning to crack under the strain.
"Well, I put my papers away and tried to take a short break. I was
reaching into my drawer where I keep magazines when, so help me, a man
stepped out of the wall into my office."
"What? It seems as if you just said a guy stepped out of the wall."
"That's just what I did say. It sounds crazy, but let me finish, will
you? I'm not kidding, and I'll show you proof later if necessary.
"Anyway, this bird stepped straight out of the wall as if it had been a
waterfall or something, but the wall itself was undamaged. The only
proof I had that he had actually done it was the fact that he was in my
office, but that was proof enough.
"To put it mildly, I was thunderstruck. After jumping to my feet, I
could only stand there like an idiot. I was so shaken that I couldn't
speak a word. But he spoke first.
"'General Garvers?' he asked, just as if he had run into me at a
cocktail party or on the street.
"I told him he was correct, and asked him who _he_ was and what he
wanted. And how he got into my office.
"He identified himself as a Henry Busch and explained that he was acting
in behalf of a good friend of his, the late Dr. Hymann Duvall. Have you
ever heard of Duvall, Max?"
His friend twisted his face in thought. "Can't say that I have,
off-hand. But the name seems to ring a bell somewhere."
"Well, anyway, he said that Duvall had perfected an invention of great
national importance shortly before his death and asked Busch to deliver
it to the government if anything should happen to him. Then Duvall died
suddenly of a heart attack."
"And what was this invention?"
"Isn't it obvious? A machine that would enable a man to walk through
walls. And Busch has no idea how the thing works, other than the general
explanation that Duvall gave him. And Busch was poles apart from Duvall.
They were friends from college, but not because of professional
interests. It seems they were both doublecrossed by the same girl.
"Duvall was a brilliant but obscure nuclear and radiation physicist. He
was one of those once-in-a-lifetime fellows like Tesla. He was so shy
that he didn't bring himself to anybody's attention, save for a few
papers he published in the smaller physical societies' magazines. It was
only because he had inherited a considerable amount of money that he
could do any research whatsoever."
"Hm-m-m. I seem to remember a paper about wave propagation in one of the
quarterlies. Quite unorthodox, as I recall," said Max.
"Could be. But anyway, about Busch.
"Busch majored in psychology at college, but took special courses after
he graduated and took a Master's in English. He has written two novels
and three collections of poems under various pen names. At the time of
Duvall's death, he was working on the libretto of an opera. He has had
no technical training, unless you want to count a year of high school
general science. So he wasn't too much help in explaining how Duvall's
instrument works.
"And, just to make matters more juicy, Duvall kept no notes. He had
total recall and a childlike fear of putting anything into writing that
had not been experimentally verified."
"And this machine, how is it supposed to work?"
Garvers got up and began to pace. "According to Busch, Duvall devised
the instrument after stumbling into an entirely new branch of physics.
"This device of Duvall's is a special case of a new theory of matter and
energy. Matter is made up of subnuclear particles--electrons, protons
and the like. However, Duvall said that these particles are in turn made
up of much smaller particles grouped together in aggregate clouds. The
size ratio of these particles to protons is somewhat like the ratio of
an individual proton to a large star. They seem to be composed of tiny
clots of energy from a fantastically complex energy system, in which
electromagnetism is but a small part. Each energy-segment is represented
by a different facet of each particle, and the arrangement of the
individual particles to each other determines what super-particle they
will form, such as an electron. Duvall called these sub-particles
'lems'.
"Busch says he was told that a field of a special nature could be
generated so as to make the individual lems in the particles of matter
rotate in a special way that would introduce a 'polarization field', as
Duvall called it. This field seems to be connected somehow with gravity,
but Busch wasn't told how.
"The upshot is that matter in the _initial_ presence of the field is
affected so that it is able to pass through ordinary matter--"
"Hold on," interrupted Max. "If a device can do that, then the user
would immediately fall towards the center of the Earth."
"Just _you_ hold on. You didn't let me finish. A single plane of atoms,
at the base of the treated object is the point of contact. It remains
partially unaffected because it is closest to the 'gravetostatic field
center', which I guess is the Earth's center of attraction. This plane
of 'semi-treated' atoms can be forced through an object, if it is moved
horizontally, but its 'untreated' aspect prevents the subject wearing
the device from falling through the floor.
"Busch demonstrated this device to me, turning it on and strolling
through various objects in this room. Think of it! No soldier could be
killed or held prisoner. And--"
"Now hang on," objected Max. "Let's not run away with ourselves. He may
have perfected a device that would enable a soldier to avoid capture,
but there would certainly be other ways to kill him than by bullets.
Let's see now: suppose that the enemy shot a flamethrower at him. The
burning materials might pass through him, but he would be cooked anyway.
Or poison gas--"
"Hm-m-m. As far as gas goes, I suppose a gas mask would be necessary.
Busch doesn't know about the breathing mechanism, except that he had to
take breaths. But as far as fire or radiation goes, the man's protected.
If the radiation is either harmful by nature or by amount, the field
merely reflects it. It is something called the 'lemic stress' of the
field that causes the phenomenon.
"That's why we need your help."
Max scratched his head thoughtfully. "I don't understand."
Garvers looked pained. "When Busch had finished his demonstration, he
carelessly tossed the device on my desk. The thing skidded and hit my
paperweight so that the switch was thrown on again. So now the device
and my desk are both untouchable.
"Go over to the desk and try to touch it," said Garvers dryly.
His friend got up and ambled over to the desk. There he saw a small
black box resting near a paperweight. Its toggle switch was at the "on"
position, and it was lying on its side. He tried to pick the box up, but
his hand slid effortlessly through it as if it were so much air.
"_Well_!" Max said. He passed his hand through the desk again. "Well,
well. Are you sure Busch told you everything?"
"Busch! He honestly wants to help and we have taken him through the
mill. Pentathol, scopolamine and the like; hypnotism and the polygraph.
We've dug that man deeper than we have ever dug anybody before."
"And have you conducted any experiments of your own?"
"Certainly. That's what is so frustrating. We try to X ray the thing,
and we don't get a thing. We bombarded it with every radiation we could
think of, from radio to gamma and it just reflected them. We can detect
no radiation coming out of it. Magnetic fields don't effect it, nor do
heat and cold. Nuclear particles are ignored by it; it just _sits_ there
thumbing its nose at us. And we can't even wait for it to run down.
According to Busch, the power requirements of the thing are funny and
once the field is established, it takes no additional energy to maintain
it. And the collapsing power remains indefinitely until it is time to
turn the machine off, but it's unreachable by any means we have.
"It's pure frustration. There's no way we can analyze it until we can
handle it, and no way we can handle it until we can turn it off. And
there's no way we can turn it off until we have analyzed it. If it were
alive, I'd think that it was laughing at us.
"Do _you_ have any ideas?" asked Garvers hopefully.
"Nothing that would help a solution at present," said Max. "But do you
remember the legend of King Tantalus?"
"Slightly. What about it?"
"Well ... if _he_ were here," said Max thoughtfully, "he'd ...
sympathize."
THE END