Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
  Transcriber's Note:
 This etext was produced from Analog Science Fact & Fiction March 1961.
 Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright
 on this publication was renewed.
    THE
  FOUR-FACED
   VISITORS
   OF ... EZEKIEL
  By ARTHUR W. ORTON
 _Ezekiel, they say, "saw de wheel"--but he saw somewhat more
 than that. And Orton suggests that what he saw made
 perfectly good sense ... to the understanding!_
  Illustrated by Orton
  *  *  *  *  *
We are told from our Sunday School days that the Bible is a "living
book," the oldest of man's written works that is read and used anew,
from generation to generation. It remains "living" because we are able
to find new meaning to fit our daily lives. Although it is not the
usual kind of new meaning, I believe that I have found something of
the sort in the very old prophesies of Ezekiel.
Bible scholars have long recognized the first chapter of Ezekiel as a
strange and nearly unfathomable account of a vision. I suggest that it
is strange only because it is written by a man far removed from us in
time and experience, about a subject totally unfamiliar to men of his
time. I do not think that this was a vision in the usual sense, nor
was it meant to be mystical. This particular chapter has been called
"Science fiction in the Bible" and many attempts have been made to
unravel the meaning of the original author, along both spiritual and
mundane lines. I am convinced that this chapter is the account of an
actual happening; the landing of extraterrestial beings, reported by a
careful, truthful and self-possessed observer.
I am not a student of theology and therefore you may feel that I am
being presumptive in attempting to throw light on a mystery as old and
well-studied as Ezekiel's first chapter. I feel that any success that
I may have in doing so will be due to the accident of my birth at the
very beginning of an era when the events I have to describe are fact,
or are about to become fact.
If, as I believe, this is an account of an actual encounter with men
from space, I may be better able to interpret the meaning than a
student of theology, who by training and interest, is looking for a
theological meaning. I have worked with mechanical things, and as an
instructor of aircraft mechanics for most of my adult life. During
this time I have had to untangle a lot of mechanical misconceptions
and misunderstandings. I think that this gives me some insight into
this problem.
If you are not too familiar with the Old Testament, I suggest that you
read through the first chapter of Ezekiel to get the feeling of the
flow of words, and a general idea of what sort of material we will be
covering. If you have done a considerable amount of reading in the
Bible, I am sure you will notice at once how different and
"un-Bible-like" this chapter sounds. It isn't long. The first chapter
covers little more than one page. Don't expect to get a clear picture
the first time through. It seems to have an elusive quality. About the
time you feel that you have hold of a fact, it seems to be
contradicted in a later verse. I am going to try to show you that this
is due to your own preconceived notions of what some of the words and
phrases mean. You, not Ezekiel, are supplying the contradictions.
You will see that I am not going to make excuses for the words, as
written. It is my belief that those who had the task of translating
the Bible from its original tongue and re-copying it through the ages
were particularly careful of this chapter because they did not
understand it and were afraid of damaging it.
Let us begin with the first verse of chapter one:
_The Book of The Prophet EZEKIEL_
803.  Chapter 1
_Now it came to pass in the thirtieth year, in the fourth month, in
the fifth day of the month, as I was among the captives by the river
of Chebar, that the heavens were opened, and I saw visions of God._
_2. In the fifth day of the month, which was the fifth year of king
Jehoiachin's captivity._
_3. The word of the Lord came expressly unto Ezekiel the priest, the
son of Buzi, in the Land of the Chaldeans by the river Chebar; and the
hand of the Lord was there upon him._
This fixes the location of this incident on the outskirts of Bagdad.
The Chebar is sometimes called "The Grand Canal of Bagdad." Although
the entire book was supposed to have been written by Ezekiel, the
second and third verses sound like an editor's note, inserted by a
later writer.
_4. And I looked, and, behold, a whirlwind came out of the north, a
great cloud, and a fire infolding itself, and a brightness was about
it, and out of the midst thereof as the colour of amber, out of the
midst of the fire._
Here is a man who had lived most of his life in arid desert country.
He had probably seen whirlwinds of all kinds, from dust-devils to
full-scale tornadoes. He was an accurate and honest observer, as we
shall see later. If he said it was a whirlwind, it must have really
been one, or at least it looked enough like one to fool him for a
while. Notice that he does not say that it was high in the air, or
that it came out of the sky, but, "... out of the north," or toward
him from the north.
The first thing that he noticed was that it had fire associated with
it, a strange companion for a whirlwind. There is something strange
about the fire itself. He says that it "infolds itself," which
suggests a fire of more active nature than Ezekiel would be accustomed
to. The association of fire and whirlwind must have struck him as
peculiar.
Also something amber colored was associated with the cloud and fire.
He said that this color came "out of the midst," which might mean that
it was above the cloud and flame, or appeared as the fire and cloud
subsided, or blew to one side. Considering the detail he gives in
later verses, this is quite vague, as it might be if he saw it from a
distance.
_5. Also out of the midst thereof came the likeness of four living
creatures. And this was their appearance; they had the likeness of a
man._
Why didn't he say that out came four men? Remember that he is telling
this to very primitive, superstitious people. He was himself bred in a
time when the supernatural was taken for granted. Under these
conditions he has gone about as far as he could by saying that they
certainly looked like four men. He does not say here that he took them
for angels or any other kind of supernatural beings.
_6. And every one had four faces, and every one had four wings._
This short verse is very clear, yet you wonder how a creature with
four faces and four wings could possibly be taken for a man, even by
you or me.
Although he does not say so, we can imply that these creatures must
have advanced much closer to him after they got out of the fire and
cloud, for him to be able to see so much detail.
Imagine the courage it took for him to stay put in order to observe
these creatures. Notice also how objective he is, never mentioning his
own feelings.
_7. And their feet were straight feet; and the sole of their feet was
like the sole of a calf's foot; and they sparkled like the colour of
burnished brass._
Each verse of the description covers one or two parts of the
creatures. When Ezekiel mentions more than one part it becomes
confusing, so that one verse seems to contradict another. These can
usually be sorted out however. Nowhere will you find a direct
contradiction.
Here he is describing the feet only. The word "straight" can be taken
several ways. Does he mean _regular feet_, or feet that point straight
forward, or feet that are straight up and down, like an elephant's?
Probably he means regular, forward-pointing feet because he does not
dwell on the point. In other places he leans heavily on simile to
describe some unusual feature of the beings.
The sole of the foot sounds as if it was heavily cleated. What then
has he described in this verse? For a person living in a warm climate
who had never seen any footwear more complicated than a sandal, he has
described a highly polished leather, plastic or metal boot very well.
_8. And they had the hands of a man under their wings on their four
sides; and they four had their faces and their wings._
Notice carefully that he is _not_ saying that each creature had four
man-like hands, one on each of four sides. He is saying that each has
the normal number of hands and they are located _below_ their wings.
Remember that he was a careful observer and he had probably noticed
that birds have wings _instead_ of arms. These had both. In addition,
he has given us another bit of information about the distribution of
the wings. They do not appear to be arranged like a biplane, but each
wing is at a ninety-degree angle from its neighboring wing like a
helicopter.
Ezekiel must have been something of a numerologist. He points out that
there are four creatures, and each of the four has four faces each,
and each has four wings each--but not four hands.
_9. Their wings were joined one to another; they turned not when they
went; they went every one straight forward._
He is not saying that the wings of one creature are joined to the
wings of another creature. He is saying that each wing is joined to
another wing, not directly to the creature.
The second and third parts of this verse present a mystery. We do not
know what the "theys" refer to. There are three "theys" in this verse,
one after another and we are given very few clues to which refer to
_creatures_ and which refer to wings. The first "they" most likely is
tied to the first part of the verse and therefore refers to the wings.
Given this, there are still three interpretations:
 1. _The wings_ turned not when _the wings_ went; _The wings_
 went every one straight forward.
 2. _The wings_ turned not when _the creatures_ went; _The
 wings_ went every one straight forward.
 3. _The wings_ turned not when _the creatures_ went; _The
 creatures_ went every one straight forward.
None of these three statements make much of a point, whether the
creatures have helicopter wings, or bird-angel wings. Let us assume
then that the first "they" refers to the creatures:
 1. _The creatures_ turned not when _the creatures_ went;
 _The creatures_ went every one straight forward.
 2. _The creatures_ turned not when _the wings_ went; _The
 wings_ went every one straight forward.
 3. _The creatures_ turned not when _the wings_ went; _The
 creatures_ went every one straight forward.
This last statement would pretty well describe the action of the
blades of an inoperative helicopter being carried forward in a
straight line. It would strike Ezekiel as odd that the wings might
move and turn without turning the men under them. You might wonder why
he would say "... wings went ..." instead of "... wings turned...."
When a light breeze moves the blades of an inoperative helicopter the
blades not only turn, but they change their pitch and plane in a most
random manner.
Although Ezekiel has not completed his description of the creatures,
we can try now to form a picture of what he saw. No matter how we bend
and squeeze, we are not going to get a Michelangelo-type angel. Look
at figure one. Go back over the points that Ezekiel has described. You
will see that it fits quite well.
_10. As for the likeness of the faces, they four had the face of a
man, and the face of a lion, on the right side; and they four had the
face of an ox on the left side; they four also had the face of an
eagle._
[Illustration]
This again does not sound very man-like. You wonder what could have
kept him from pronouncing them demons. If you will study figure two,
you will see what Ezekiel described. Now look at figure three. How
much better could a man living six centuries before Christ describe
figure three?
_11. Thus were their faces: and their wings were stretched upward; Two
wings of every one were joined one to another, and two covered their
bodies._
See figure one again. The arrangement is like he describes. Notice
that when he talks about "... the wings ..." of one creature, he
apparently means the whole system of wings and attachments.
_12. And they went every one straight forward: wither the spirit was
to go, they went; and they turned not as they went._
Again we have trouble with the "theys." Notice however, that the first part
of this verse repeats the last part of verse nine. If we were right in that
verse, the first "they" in this refers to the creatures again. The second
part of this verse contains a new idea, "whither the spirit was to go ...",
has an opposite meaning from "... they went ... straight forward ..."
and, "... they turned not when they went." The first and last part sounds
like the four creatures were marching purposefully in one direction. If
then the second or middle part refers to the wings, we could read it:
 "And _the creatures_ went every one straight forward:
 whither the spirit was to go, _the wings_ went; and _the
 creatures_ turned not when _the wings_ went."
Again we have a picture of four men walking with their inoperative
helicopters moving in several different ways as the breeze and the
men's motions cause them to move slightly.
Notice that Ezekiel seems to be more impressed with the wings and
their motion than with any other feature of what he witnessed.
_13. As for the likeness of the living creatures, their appearance was
like burning coals of fire, and like the appearance of lamps: it went
up and down among the living creatures; and the fire was bright, and
out of the fire went forth lightning._
[Illustration]
Here he is describing their over-all appearance. We can assume that
creatures that look like men but has a surface that resembles lights,
coals and fire must be wearing suits with a brightly colored metallic
surface. The modern anodized aluminium coatings glisten and sparkle
with an effect like he describes. If these are space-suits, there is a
good reason for making them gaudy. If they were worn in space while
working on and around a ship, they should be as bright and
eye-catching as possible, in the case the man became detached and
floated away. He would be quite visible against the blackness of
space.
_14. And the living creatures ran and returned as the appearance of a
flash of lightning._
This might mean that they moved swiftly, but more than likely it means
that they sparkled and shined on all sides, and this was visible as
they moved about.
This ends the description for a while. There are two later verses of
description, but we will take this when we come to it. It is
surprising that Ezekiel has organized his material so well. It reads
like a scientific report. If he had headed the section that we just
covered, "Description," we would not have been too surprised to find
the following section headed, "Action":
_15. Now as I beheld the living creatures, behold one wheel upon the
earth by the living creatures, with his four faces._
If we read Ezekiel correctly and the creatures did have helicopter
attachments on their backs, we can assume that one of them now
started his helicopter, which would appear as a "wheel" to Ezekiel,
and probably surprised him greatly.
_16. The appearance of the wheels and their work was like unto the
colour of Beryl: and they four had one likeness: and their appearance
and their work was as it were a wheel in the middle of a wheel._
Here we must digress in order to put ourselves into the life and time
of this man because he has mentioned the wheel. A wheel did not have
quite the same meaning for him as it does for you and I, living in a
mechanical age. The wheel in 600 B.C. in the area around the eastern
end of the Mediterranean, the most civilized part of the world at that
time, had only a few very limited uses.
One use, old even in Ezekiel's time was the potter's wheel; a simple
platform mounted on crude vertical bearings so that it could be turned
with one hand while the clay was worked with the other. From this the
grindstone and the lapidary wheel developed for working metal and
stone. These early machines probably employed some form of foot
treadle but even these could not turn the wheel very fast. If the
stone had a large enough diameter, it was possible to get the speed at
the outer edge high enough to produce sparks when grinding hard
material. The "work" took place at some distance from the axis,
usually at the edge of the stone.
The wheel we usually associate with ancient times is the cart wheel.
In its earliest form it was a solid wheel, like those still in use in
primitive sections of Mexico. Even with the cart wheel, ancient man
would associate the edge of the wheel with the "work" of the wheel.
This was the part that left a track in the mud and dust, crushed an
occasional rock and fractured an occasional toe.
In order to increase the efficiency of military chariots it was
necessary to build a wheel that was lighter, yet just as strong as the
solid model. This was first done by cutting out "lightening holes"
between the hub and rim. Pressing this invention to the ultimate
produced a spoked wheel. The Egyptians used a six-spoked chariot wheel
thousands of years before Ezekiel's time, and the Greeks and others
had four-spoke models. This was quite an invention and in addition to
its useful aspects, it produced some rather unusual, even magical
side-effects. As every child knows, if you turn your tricycle
upside-down and spin the wheel, the spokes seem to vanish. All that
can be seen is the rim and the parts of the hub near the center of
rotation. No matter what shape the hub actually is, it too looks round
like a wheel. It is very likely that such an effect was referred to as
"a wheel within a wheel."
In verse 16 Ezekiel says that, "wheels and their work was the colour
of beryl ...", a blue-green color. This sounds like the emphasis is on
the color at the _edge_ of the wheel. This could be from a flame
coming from jets on the tips of the rotors.
All of the creatures must have started their rotors. ("... they four
had one likeness.") They looked like "... a wheel in the middle of a
wheel." Or the spinning spokes of a wheel. Notice also that he never
mentions "wings" and "wheels" at the same time, for when one appears
the other vanishes.
_17. When they went, they went upon their four sides: and they turned
not when they went._
If four men were standing fairly close together on the ground with
running helicopters, they would tend to spread out as they left the
ground, so as to not run into each other. Moreover, with a helicopter,
it is not necessary to _face_ the direction you intend to go. This
sounds like four men lifting off the ground, spreading out slightly
and starting up and away, in formation.
_18. As for their rings, they were so high that they were dreadful;
and their rings were full of eyes round about them four._
The four creatures are now high in the air above Ezekiel, a dreadful
and awe-inspiring sight for a man of Ezekiel's time. Their "rings"
obviously are the flames from their tip-jets, seen from below--the
only part of the wheel now visible from far below. And the rings
_would_ be full of eyes. When a jet or rocket motor is operating there
is a shock wave generated in the tailpipe which tends to cut the
exhaust gas into segments. Time exposures of jet aircraft at night
often show this. When a tip-jet is operating, these bright, evenly
spaced spots give it the appearance of a string of pearls, "... full
of eyes round about them...."
_19. And when the living creatures went, the wheels went up by them:
and when the living creatures were lifted up from the earth, the
wheels were lifted up._
Ezekiel makes it clear that he does not know whether the men are
lifting the wheels or the wheels lifting the men, but both went up
together.
_20. Withersoever the spirit was to go, they went, thither was their
spirit to go; and the wheels were lifted over against them: for the
spirit of the living creatures was in the wheels._
This is a most sophisticated opinion. Although Ezekiel was describing
only what he saw, he could not help but have some opinions about the
creatures. In verse nineteen he makes it clear that he does not know
whether man is lifting the machine, or the other way around, but here
he makes it clear that whichever, there is no doubt that the creatures
are _controlling_. They are not being carried off by the will of the
wheel.
_21. When those went, these went; and when those stood, these stood;
and when those were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted
up over against them: for the spirit of the living creatures was in
the wheels._
This carries the idea of control one step farther. Not only are the
men controlling the wheels, but they are self-controlled: They are
flying in formation.
_22. And the likeness of the firmament upon the heads of the living
creatures was as the colour of terrible crystal, stretched forth over
their heads above._
Perhaps this verse was moved out of it's original position, for it
returns to the description of the creatures. You may have noticed that
many of the verses are written so that it is in part, an enlargement
of the thought put forward in the preceding verse, and part new
thought, to be enlarged upon in the following verse. Verses twenty-two
and twenty-three _seem_ to go together. Both would fit the rest of the
chapter better if they were between verses twelve and thirteen.
What is meant by "firmament"? These people had no term for a
hollow-sphere. Most spherical objects were not hollow. They had no
soap, so they had no soap bubbles. The most common thing to compare a
hollow sphere to was the sky, the bowl of the heavens--the firmament.
This crystal-clear bubble was over the heads of the creatures, one on
each creature.
We will come to the word firmament again, but notice that this is,
"... the _likeness_ of the firmament ...", not the firmament itself.
Later verses speak only of the "firmament".
_23. And under the firmaments were their wings straight, the one
toward the other: every one had two, which covered on this side, and
every one had two which covered on that side, their bodies._
If you changed "... under the firmament ..." to, "... below the sky"
you would get a clearer picture. If you look at the picture of a
house, the roof is, "below the sky," if you start at the top and work
down. If you start at the ground and work up, the roof is, "at the
top" of the house. Ezekiel's description of the wings, which is
continued in this verse, concerns the wings "at the top." They are
(connected), "... one toward the other, about like in figure one."
_24. And when they went, I heard the noise of their wings, like the
noise of great waters, like the voice of the Almighty, the voice of
speech, as the noise of the host: when they stood they let down their
wings._
If you have ever stood near a running tip-jet, or any jet engine, I
think you will know what Ezekiel means. The last statement is most
interesting. It seems that when the creatures landed again they
detached the helicopter mechanisms and set them down, as anyone will
with a heavy back-pack who is resting or waiting.
_25. And there was a voice from the firmament that was over their
heads, when they stood, and had let down their wings._
This voice, or sound, was not from the _likeness_ of the firmament,
but from the sky, as they stood there with their wings off.
This is the end of Ezekiel's attention to the four creatures.
_26. And above the firmament that was over their heads was the
likeness of a throne, as the appearance of a sapphire stone; and upon
the likeness of the throne was the likeness as the appearance of a man
above upon it._
Out of the sky comes a man on a green seat. But a throne is more than
a chair. It is usually associated with a platform. This may be some
kind of flying platform similar to those being tested for the
transporting of infantry.
_27. And I saw as the colour of amber, as the appearance of fire round
about within it, from the appearance of his loins even upward, and
from the appearance of his loins even downward, I saw as it were the
appearance of fire, and it had brightness round about._
Since this thing was high over their heads, and he saw fire round
about it, the fire may have been on the under side. What he says about
the man is very like what he said about the other four, except that he
describes the man from the waist, up and down, as if he could not see
the area near the man's waist.
_28. As the appearance of the bow that is in the cloud in the day of
rain, so was the appearance of the brightness round about. This was
the appearance of the likeness of the glory of the Lord. And when I
saw it, I fell upon my face, and I heard a voice of one who spake._
What prismatic effect, brighter than the outdoor desert sunshine is
hard to imagine, but a large shining object close at hand would be
pretty terrifying. It seems strange that Ezekiel would not throw
himself upon the ground, after withstanding all he had seen up till
now, but we must remember that a man seated on a throne, a flying
throne at that might have a lot more meaning for him than it would for
you and me. If this object happened to come down closer to him than
the other creatures had, he might well have broken.
We have now covered every verse of the first chapter quite thoroughly.
Since the Book of Ezekiel contains forty-eight chapters, we might fear
that this is just the beginning of a long and tiring study.
Fortunately or unfortunately this is not the case. The second chapter
begins:
_804._
_And he said unto me, Son of man, stand upon they feet, and I will
speak to thee._
_2. And the spirit entered into me when he spake unto me, and set me
upon my feet, that I heard him that spake unto me._
_3. And he said unto me, Son of man, I send thee to the children of
Israel, to a rebellious nation that hath rebelled against me: they and
their fathers have transgressed against me, even unto this very day._
This typically prophetic writing goes on for many pages, telling the
woes and sins of the Israelites. Reference is made in a few places to
the material in the first chapter, but even this dies out before the
end of the book.
No mention is made again of the living creatures till chapter three
where the following verse is found:
_13. I heard also the noise of the wings of the living creatures that
touched one another, and the noise of the wheels over against them,
and a noise of great rushing._
This combines some of the ideas of earlier verses without adding any
new information. Notice that writer has the notion that the wings of
one creature touched those of another, or that the creatures touched
one another.
This verse is typical of several more scattered throughout the first
third of the book. All the verses mentioning the living creatures
after the first chapter are more dramatic and all fail to continue the
style of a careful reporter. No new ideas are advanced, but some
rather unusual contradictions are introduced, by using several parts
of several verses of Chapter One. Chapter Ten reads like an attempt at
rephrasing Chapter One and Chapter Eleven is the last mention of the
living creatures in the entire book.
Although it contains no further information on the living creatures,
Chapter Three has a verse that should be mentioned. Verse fifteen
sounds like a fitting conclusion to the first chapter:
[Illustration]
_15. Then I came to them of the captivity at Tel-Abib, that dwelt by
the river Chebar, and I sat where they sat, and remained there
astonished among them for seven days._
Just what do we have? We have a description of four spacesuited and
helicopter-equipped men, getting off of, or out of something that
landed in a cloud of dust or smoke. The four men start their
helicopters, take off and fly to some height. On returning to the
ground they remove their flying gear and wait. They are met by a fifth
man, riding on a flying platform. Such an event would cause some
interest in any community today, but in those times it could only be
interpreted as supernatural--a miracle. The miracle may well be that
the story has been preserved for us, twenty-six centuries later.
A word for word interpretation is only part of the oddity of this
chapter. Several other aspects are worth pondering. The whole chapter
has a well-worn feeling, as though the author had told and re-told it
many times. It reads like a deposition, taken down by a police
officer, after the witness, who prides himself on truthfulness, has
told the story over and over to his incredulous friends. It has a
certain poetic beauty. It has the style of one who is telling you the
truth, no matter whether you are going to believe it or not. It is
the presentation of a tableau that makes no sense to the man who
witnessed it, or to those to whom he is describing it.
The product of a man's imagination is tied to his own experience, his
own time. A wonderful tale of the supernatural may sound very
imaginative to the contemporary of the teller, but it will date itself
to a later generation. The lives of the Greek gods are related to the
lives of the early Greeks. An imaginative science-fiction writer such
as Jules Verne is limited in the same way. As good as he was,
experience has set an outer limit to his imagination. Ezekiel's tale
is not in this class. To his contemporaries, it was out of step with
reality. To us it is real enough, but out of step with time. The most
credible explanation is that it really happened.
  *  *  *  *  *
Perhaps there are some points of my interpretation that you do not
agree with, but as a whole the story does hang together rather well.
If you have the feeling that it would be easy to fit the words around
an entirely different set of circumstances, I suggest that you try.
It is interesting to know that some years ago a verbal battle raged in
theological circles as to whether Ezekiel wrote the Book of Ezekiel.
One school of thought held that he did, while the other school held
that the first chapter was a "forgery," written in the third century
before Christ, and tacked on as a sort of "leader" to Ezekiel's book.
For our purposes it cannot be a forgery. It makes little difference
how long ago it was written, so long as it was not since World War II!
Suppose Ezekiel or some ancient man actually saw what I have proposed.
What are the possible explanations? Is it possible that some ancient
race, unknown to us, could have developed such equipment? It is not
likely. During the last one hundred years we have been prodding about
in the earth and finding so many ancient records that someone else
besides Ezekiel would certainly have left us a report on them.
The things that were science fiction twenty years ago are solid fact
now. We know that a landing on the Moon is only a question of time, a
few years at the most. The planets of our Solar System will follow, at
least some before the turn of the century, probably. As for the
planets of neighboring stars we cannot say. We have no way of
exploring them at present, but that is not the same as saying that we
never will. If the past performance of the human race is any measure,
they will likely fall to exploration within two hundred years.
If you concede that it is possible that we can visit other star
systems in a future not too distant, why then could we not have been
visited some time in the past? It may tend to deflate our ego to think
that there may be intelligent beings not too different from us who are
advanced beyond us. It need not. One of the most striking features of
Ezekiel's story, if it has been decoded correctly, is that these
beings are very much like we are, right at the present time. That puts
them three or four thousand years ahead of us, a very small amount
indeed when we consider the long sweep of human life and development
before the dawn of written history.
We are so used to stories of "Bug-eyed Monsters" coming to Earth, that
the idea of beings from other worlds looking and acting human seems
fantastic. It should not. There is good sound scientific reason to
believe that there is little chance of it being any other way. Life is
a delicate and fragile thing when compared to cosmic extremes of
temperature and environment in our universe. If life formed on earth
as science now believes that it did, we must have had just the right
size planet at just the right distance from a particular type of star.
While such extremely narrow limits are going to reduce the number of
places in the universe where life can develop, it is also going to
limit the _differences_. In our creation things operate by rule. The
rule is that in similar circumstance there are similar solutions to a
problem. Man is the solution of the problem of building the highest
form of life on Earth. On a similar planet we can expect to find a
similar solution. This is simply the extension of the theory of
_parallel evolution_ to a cosmic scale.
If then, we were visited by people from another world, what were they
doing here? Strangely enough, there is considerable evidence of what
they were up to from Ezekiel's own testimony. Let us suppose that
these creatures were very much like we expect to be in five hundred
years. They have come from some other star system in a ship whose
principle of operation is as yet unknown to us. We can assume that it
was a rather large ship, being that there were five beings on board at
once, and we can presume that enough of a crew remained aboard to
return it home in case something happened to the explorers. How would
we proceed in such a case?
It is not likely that such a large ship would be brought down to the
surface of the earth. After arriving in the neighborhood of the earth,
it would be put into orbit, and the surface of the earth would be
studied through telescopes for days or weeks. The entire radio
spectrum would be scanned to determine if there were inhabitants
below, capable of operating electrical equipment. A small--manned or
unmanned--flyer would be sent down into the upper atmosphere to
determine the level of radioactivity, air components, spore and
bacteria count and radio signals incapable of penetrating the
atmosphere. From the ship the land areas would be mapped and studied.
Any large object on the ground that appeared to be of an artificial
nature would be given particular attention. During the night-time
hours below, these objects and areas would be very carefully observed
for signs of light.
In the case of our visitors of twenty-six centuries ago, this is what
they would have found: Quite a few artificial works could be seen.
Cultivated fields and large buildings would be easily visible in many
places around the eastern end of the Mediterranean. The Pyramids were
old even then. (The Great Wall in China probably had not been
started.) There would be no radio sounds, except for an occasional
lightning click. We do not know how well their cities were lighted at
night, but they were probably too dim to see. Tiny orange pinpoints of
light from outdoor bonfires could probably be seen around the globe,
but there would be more of them around the Mediterranean and in the
East and Near East than anywhere else. The radioactivity level would
be low. Our visitors would conclude that the inhabitants were either
in the early stages of civilization, or were once highly civilized and
now sunk back to a primitive stage. They would know that this was due
to something other than atomic war.
We have to conclude that these were moral beings. If the conditions
below were as they seemed to be, that of an early civilization, they
would not want to interfere. They would want to observe without being
observed, so even if it were technically possible they would not want
to bring a large ship down. They would send down as small and
inconspicuous a vehicle as possible.
We usually picture such a craft as a small version of the larger ship,
or a large--by our standards--rocket, or an aircraft similar to our
Dyna-soar. For people this advanced technologically something a lot
simpler might be used. It might be an open vehicle, similar to our
flying platforms, but with vastly more powerful nuclear power plants.
The men going down would have to wear air-tight suits--spacesuits, and
would have to leave them on all the time they were below, for fear of
becoming infected with molds and viruses that the natives would long
since have become immune to. One man, the pilot, would stay with the
platform while the others did the observing and recording.
The flying platform would have no need for rapid forward motion, at
least inside the atmosphere and therefore would have little need for
streamlining or protective covering for the passengers, who would
carry their equipment with them. Most of the equipment for the survey
would be built into the suits. They would each carry a set of portable
helicopter attachments so they could cover more ground in a hurry.
Like small helicopters of our time, these probably would have a rather
limited speed and range, but they would be extremely maneuverable.
The platform on the other hand, being nuclear powered, would probably
be very powerful and have almost unlimited range, but it would be less
maneuverable. The products of its exhaust might be radioactive and
therefore its operators would be reluctant to operate it above or
near the natives of the planet, or places that they frequented.
As they push away from the mother-ship the spacemen would be in
free-fall and would tend to "float" nearby until they turned the
bottom side of the platform toward the direction of their orbit and
applied power. They would then drop toward the surface, but with
almost unlimited power available they could keep the downward
component of their fall within limits and prevent overheating. They
could probably be on the surface in less than an hour.
The first and most likely area of exploration would be Egypt. The
platform could be landed a few miles back from the Nile and be in
completely unoccupied desert. The four helicopter-equipped explorers
could put on their rotating-wing backpacks and by keeping low, come up
very close to some center of civilization without being seen. By going
up to a few thousand feet they could observe a fairly large area. Even
if they were spotted, they would be small and unrecognizable, and
cause a minimum amount of excitement.
Like any tourist in any age they would probably be most interested in
the territory around the pyramids. When they had finished here they
might want to look over the country around what is now Bagdad, but
_then_ only near the capital city of Nebuchadnezzar's empire. This is
about eight hundred miles away, an impractical trip by helicopter, so
they would return to the platform, climb to a few hundred thousand
feet, and scoot over in a few minutes. Here they would land again in
some uninhabited spot and repeat the maneuver. This country was
probably sprinkled with more people than they expected. Maybe that's
why this is the legendary flying carpet country, or maybe not. At any
rate, one lonely military prisoner, working by himself near the banks
of a stream must have seen them. Even if they did notice him, what
possible harm could he do? In the present state of the civilization
who would remember what he said or even believe him? I do.
THE END
  *  *  *  *  *