“RECKLESS” 

by 

JEAN MARIE 
STINE 

MIKE 

RESNICK 

ALMA MARIE 
GARCIA 

ROBERT E. 
ROGOFF 

CYNTHIA 

WARD 

JAMES L. 
WRIGHT, JR. 

L.S. 

SILVERTHORNE 

GREG 

COSTIKYAN 

LYN 

NICHOLS 

GREGORY 
FITZ GERALD 

MARSH 

CASSADY 

MARK 

MCLAUGHLIN 

GORDON R. 
DICKSON 

BJO 

TRIMBLE 

CLAUDE 

NEEDHAM 



COVER ART 

for “Reckless” 
1995 ZOE 




2 



GALAXY 




5l Graphics Editions, Limited 
Limited Edition Serigraptis 

"Martha Graham" 

^ity in the Sky, Cobblestone" 

"A Small Pond" 

"The Hermit" % 



Prites available on reaues 

■ 

152 Mill Street Suite E 
Grass Valley CA 95-945 
Call (916) 27>-l72S EXT 



2ephyz drum company 



s' 






The Truly Empowered Woman 



Creates Her Own Damn Universe. 

READ 



MODELING - CRAFTS 
FICTION - SCIENCE OF DYING 

Sample Issue $2.25 postage 
PO Box 370 Nevada City CA 95959 
Call 1-800-869-0658 or (916) 432-1716 



Glazed ceramic drums (I to r): Inanna $125, Amber $90, 
Nasrudin $150, Darius $125 



Say - 

What if you found yourself 
in an eternal chamber, and 
could only have one drum 
in there in with you, what 
kind would it be? 

A 2EPHYR, of course - 



Zephyr Drum Company 
P.O. Box 22693 
Santa Fe, NM, 87502-2693 
Tel: (800) 488-3402 
Fax: (505) 983-401 1 

“I've had mine forever. ” - The Absolute 



ADVERTISEMENT 



3 



DARE TO BE A WOMAN 



of 

Ancient Lands 

QuaCity 
Resonance 
Empowerment ... 

Color combinations , 
materials , patterns , all 
contribute to make 
Jewels of Ancient Lands' 
necklaces rare, sought-after 
creations which will last for 
generations. 



JAL 7708 

UR STYLE 

8-corner ancient Carnelian 
c. 2500 B.C., Chinese 
Turquoise tubes and rondels, 

Hand-crafted in Sri Lanka 
granulated Sterling Silver 
cage beads, on Sterling Silver 
wire links. Limited Edition. 

$750 

Jewels of Ancient Lands 

P.O. Box 370, Nevada City , CA 95959 
for information caff 1-800-869-0658 or 916-432-1839 






4 



GALAXY 




Digital Photo Composition 
Flying Logos 

Character Design and Animation 
Virtual Reality World Building 

VlRTUA WHIMSEY 




Did last year's blockbuster dinopic 
leave you with a craving to show off 
to your friends your pet Jurassic car- 
nivore in the back yard? 

Let us do it for you! 

We h ave a full library of early 
Jurassic through late Cretaceous meat 
and plant eaters to forage through the 
leftovers Spot left behind on the back 
porch. 

Have a new business or product 
you're introducing? Let our CC char- 
acters help you do it! Have all the 
hardware for VR travel but don't 
know where you're going? Visit 
cyberspace on a bit-plane budget! 

Full color photos up to 11x17 from 
your color photo. Video animation 
professionally done at broadcast reso- 
lution. 



P.O. Box 1192, Penn Valley, Ca. 95946 Voice (916)274-3444 Fax (916)274-0649 





ADVERTISEMENT 



5 





SENSE OF WONDER HOBBIES. 

1-800-869-0658 OR 916-432-1716 



Ceramic 
Care Bears 

but not so fuzzy 



Sweet Medicine Bear Studio 
P.O. Box 22693 
Santa Fe, NM, 87502-2693 
Tel: (800) 488-3402 
Fax: (505) 983-401 1 



THE ROBOTS ARE NOT COMING. THEY ARE HERE. 



AND THEY'RE NOT 
PROGRAMMED WITH 
ASIMOV'S LAWS. 
FORTUNATELY, 
THEY'RE SMALL 
ENOUGH TO ORDER 
AROUND. 



KITS START AT $44 
INSTRUCTION: CALL 
FOR MORE INFORMA- 
TION, PRICES AND 
AVAILABLITY 



Buy These 



You'll love them 




6 



GALAXY 



s 

s 



T 

T 



O P ! 
O IP l 



CHINESE 

EIRE 

DRILL! 



Just stop out of your oar, and listen carefully. 



We'd like to announce 

THE OFFICIAL GALAXY COMMEMORATIVE ALBUM 

galaxians 

THE BEST OF EVERY ZAPHOD ALBUM, 
PEES ALL-MEW MATERIAL STRAIGHT FROM THE MASTERS. 





galaxians 



J?i* «1*i »»» < t rw:r«t»»%\iinc 4«fwtn 



Zaphotl A. flic Alien AlllMrs 



SPECIAL OFFER! 

If you are a subscriber to Galaxy: The Galaxians Tape (regularly $15) plus a 
Galaxians "Not For Human Consumption" Mug with the Galaxians image on one 
side (reg. $9.95) MT148 & (MUG19) - BOTH for only $16.95 plus $5 shipping and handling 

TO ORDER, OR TO RECEIVE A FREE UNION LABEL CATALOG, CALL 1-800-869-0658, 

OR USE THE CONVENIENT ORDER FORM IN THIS ISSUE 





Ace of Cups 

Our newest design - Good fortune will rain on those 
who wear this shirt! M-XXL two colors (ink colors will 
vary) on black, white, ash, or blue shirt. 



Sizes M-XXL white on black (shown) or black on white. 
Specify color & size. CA residents add 7.25% tax. 
Send check or M.O. to: 



A* * * sena cnecK or ivi.u. to: 

w!sui *\ C twutcc OtfUjCiCl po box 794 penn valley ca 95946 

9 (/ 0 O » ©1995 FTG 1-800-887-8536 • 916-432-9004 



COFFEE-TIME SPECIAL: $12 PLUS $3 SHIPPING 




ADVERTISEMENT 



7 





BW10150 
Coffee Pot 
$1 80 

BW1125 0 
Creamer 
$14 0 



All products guaranteed. 
Your money refunded if you're 
not completely satisfied. 




BW31351 Salt, Pepper and 

Cheese Shaker 

$225 



BG41001 
Large Bowl, 

14" diameter $250 



ORDER FROM OUR CATALOG! 

IT'S EASY 

EASY: FILL OUT ORDER FORM AND MAIL IT TO US WITH YOUR 
CHECK. CALL FOR SHIPPING CHARGES. 

EASIER: FILL OUT ORDER FORM ON PAGE 90 & FAX IT TO US. 
EASIEST: ORDER BY PHONE - PAY WITH YOUR CREDIT CARD. 
ORDER LINE: 1-800 869-0658 / 916-432-1716 
FAX LINE: 916-432-1810 
MAILING ADDRESS: P.O. BOX 370 
NEVADA CITY, CA 95959 






8 



GALAXY 





O. The children have a magic door in the corner of their room. 
But they grow up remembering a little of those childhood voy- 
ages, thinking only that it would be wonderful if it were really 
possible to return there. 

It is possible. 



/. The ancients used many assisting factors, including herbal 
substances, sacred spaces, miniatures, chanting, drumming, and 
other tools in order to reach and work in these other worlds. 

But they didn't have the tank. 



J.Our activities, tasks, habits, jobs and responsibili- 
ties all conspire together to make us forget that there is 
much, much more to life. Here is freedom. 



I . Time and space - two ways of looking at the 
same continuum. View one and the other is open 
and available to you at the same moment. Altered 
space equals altered time. 



The Samadhi Floatation Tank is a way into 
other spaces and other times. 



Samadhi Tank Company 
PO Box 2119 
Nevada City CA 95959 
For more information 
call (916) 477-1319 
1 -800-869-0658 



6. The tank is a safe and effective time altering 
mechanism. It is not guaranteed that you will return 
to the same world, and that's part of the adventure. 
The tank is a doorway. The tank is a time machine. 



space ship samadhi 

the original floatation tank..> 



4. But you will know that it is your conscious- 
ness that empowers time and space, concealed 
by an ordinary piece of furniture in your living 
or bedroom. 



2 . It's the doorway in the back of the closet; the 
opening in the trees that leads into other worlds. 



O . There it sits, a truly innocuous time 
machine, taking up only a few square 
feet in your home, that you can climb 
into and go anywhere. 



9 . It's the only way to get out 
of this world alive. 





Editorial 

Reckless 

Me and My Shadow 

Crystal 

Knockout 

Dessert 

I'm Dying Out Here 

Dances with Elves 

Bad Moon Rising 

Sacrifice 

Syrup of Greep 

That’s Progress 

The Difference a Day Makes 

Mutant 

Silky, Slinky, Fabulous — To Die For 

Man in the Mailbag 

Trek Diary 

For Your Information 

DEPARTMENTS 



E. J. Gold 10 

Jean Marie Stine 11 

Mike Resnick 22 

Alma Maria Garcia 29 

Robert E. Rogoff 33 

Robert E. Rogoff 35 

Robert E. Rogoff 36 

Cynthia Ward 40 

James L. Wright, Jr 42 

L.S. Silverthome 49 

Greg Costikyan 51 

Lyn Nichols 54 

Gregory Fitz Gerald 55 

Marsh Cassady 57 

Mark McLaughlin 59 

Gordon R. Dickson 61 * 

Bjo Trimble 74 



Claude Needham, Ph.D. 76 



Jiffy Thoroughthink's 5-Star Book Review 



39 



ARTISTS 

Claude Needham, Heather Valencia, Lin Larsen, Zoe, Tim Elston, Richard Hart, Stephanie Boyd, 
Seth Gold, Della Heywood, Kelly Rivera, Tom X, Frank Kelly Freas, 

Chris Williamson, George Metzger, Tom Doran, Virgil Finlay 



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

“Me and My Shadow” © 1984 Mike Resnick, “Man in the Mailbag” ©1959 Gordon R. Dickson 
SPECIAL THANKS to Media Zap Advertising and Scanners Proofreading. 



EDITORIAL STAFF 

E. J. GOLD, Fiction Editor DAVID G. FRANCO, Publisher 

CLAUDE NEEDHAM, Science Editor TABATHA JONES, Managing Editor 

HORACE L. GOLD, Contributing Editor JEAN MARIE STINE, Contributing Editor 

FORREST J ACKERMAN, Contributing Editor ANN-VICTORIA HOPCROFT, Production Manager 

LINDA CORRIVEAU, Computer Graphics BARBARA HAYNES, Art Director 

IVEN LOURIE, Assistant Editor MARVETTE KORT, Computer Graphics 

MARY CRAIGIE, Assistant Editor NANCY J. BURNS, Assistant Editor 

MORGAN FOX AGENCY, Advertising Director 



GALAXY MAGAZINE is published bi-monthly by the Institute for the Development of the Harmonious Human Being, Inc., a 
California not-for-profit corporation. Main Office: 11394 Pleasant Valley Road, Penn Valley, California 95946. Mailing Address: 
GALAXY Magazine, P. O. Box 370, Nevada City, CA 95959. Telephone 916/432-1839, FAX 916/432-1810. SINGLE COPY $2.50 
U.S., $3.50 CANADA. SUBSCRIPTIONS: 6 copies/year. U.S. Bulk Rate $18, U.S. First Class $22, Canada $28, Great 

Britain/Europe $30, Pacific Rim $32. U.S. Dollars Only. © 1995 IDHHB, Inc. All rights, including translations, reserved. ISSN # 
1073-4422. All stories printed in this magazine are fiction and/or satire, and any similarity between characters and actual persons is 
coincidental. Authors and artists retain copyright of their works. All offers set forth in this magazine are subject to change without 
notice, but what isn’t? PRINTED IN U.S.A. 



10 



GALAXY 




EDITORIAL 



By E.J. GOLD 

Illustrated by Finlay 

ightning flashed and thunder rolled across the 
/ darkening sky as I lay flat on my back, staring 
through the steel-framed glass at the lower east 
side skyline. 

We lived on the tenth floor, which meant that 
almost everything else in the neighborhood was several 
stories below us. 

I could see all the way to the East River from my 
bedroom window; Brooklyn Heights glowed dimly in the 
pale moonless night. 

Distant sirens pierced the evening stillness; so did 
the honking, roaring, thrumming, screaming din that 
churned incessantly below us, day and night. 

If you’ve ever lived in a city like New York or 
Naples, you’d understand, then, what happened to me on 
my first night away from the city. 

Sure, I’d lived in Columbia, South Carolina, during 
most of the war — near Fort Charleston — but since 1945, 
had spent virtually every waking and sleeping moment 
of my life (one day was a much larger percentage of my 
life then, and passed far more slowly) thoroughly steeped 
in the kind of noise pollution unknown until modern 
times. 



Now that I’m much, much older (I’m at the age 
where a year goes by like a minute, and a minute goes by 
like a year — or was that always the way it was?) the 
noise pollution seems even worse. 

Not today’s noise pollution. Hell, I know that’s 
worse. No, it’s my own noise pollution, the sounds I 
grew up with, grew to expect. Like roentgens, it was part 
of my background radiation, the tabula overcrowdica 
upon which I painted the scenes of my life. 

That first night in the country was like an eternity in 
hell. I listened, at first, for any sound. The stillness and 
silence grew terrible and oppressive, hurting my 
eardrums with the sheer absence of grinding, perpetual 
auditory assaults. 

Maybe you know the sensation and the feeling. The 
overwhelming panic when you realize that there’s 
probably never going to be a distant wailing siren 
growing ever-closer, answering a 208 robbery 
downstairs in 3-B. 

I lay there shivering in the summer darkness, 
straining for the slightest engine hum, brake, horn, 
another horn, another horn, an ocean of horns and 
curses. .no use; the insurmountable silence remained 
unmoved, an adamantine adversary, if I may quote a 
recently unpurchased story ms. 

Suddenly, sometime around three in the morning — 
I had lain awake since forced retirement at nine P.M. — a 
shot (now, of course, I realize it must have been a 
backfiring Plymouth Sedan which our neighbor, Ada 
Sparer, drove every morning down to the open-air 
market) rang out and reverberated against Bear Mountain 
out toward Saugerties. Reassured, my head fell back onto 
the softness of the goose-down pillow and I passed into a 
deep, dreamless sleep. 

— E.J. GOLD 



HERE ARE A FEW GOOD BOOKS NO 
STARSHIP'S LIBRARY SHOULD BE 
WITHOUT 




Sirius Science Fiction leather bound limited 
editions with original illustrations 

A.J. Langguth, Jesus Christs 
Forry Ackerman, Sense of Wonder 
Robert Sheckley, Skulking Permit 
EJ. Gold's Guide to the Galaxy & Beyond the Unknown 

1 - 800 - 869-0658 



RECKLESS 



11 




RECKLESS: 

The New Sven Fort 
Novelette 

By JEAN MARIE STINE 

Illustrated by Zoe 

he man his neighbors called Sven Fort took a sip 
from the screwdriver, a drag from a Camel 
“have a real cigarette”) and looked at his guests 
eat and drink in the unseasonable October sunshine. His 
backyard held the usual eclectic Georgetown collection: 
one laughing clique included Irving, a dentist, a 
professor, a lobbyist, an attorney, and the toothy young 
senator from Massachusetts women were said to find 
irresistible. 

Sven sensed a diminutive presence. “More ribs, 
Senator Rankin?” Without waiting for an answer, he 
speared meat from the barbecue and dropped it on the 
Mississippian’s plate next to JoAnn’s potato salad. 

“Thank yah, Sven,” the gnomish senator lifted a 
glass of Old Taylor. “Yah an’ yo’ pretty wife sho’ put on 
a feed.” 

Sven’s glance went to JoAnn. He couldn’t help 
admiring her trim figure and poise among their 
Georgetown neighbors. She was fussing with a baby, 
dark hair caught behind one ear, a rare smile on her kind, 
serene face. JoAnn wanted children — but couldn’t have 



them. (One reason Sven had married her; if ferrets ever 
forced him to flee this era, he didn’t want to leave a 
woman behind burdened with children.) 

“You air a true Southerner, Sven,” Rankin rolled 
away, a short, almost comic figure in his old-fashioned 
tie and collar, “even if yah hail from Norway.” 

“Thank you, Senator.” He wondered what the 
segregationist’s opinion would be, if Rankin knew the 
truth about his ancestry. Although he couldn’t help liking 
the senator personally — Sven hated the man’s politics. 
A racist and Red-baiter who branded the Civil Rights 
movement a communist plot, Rankin had helped kill 
Truman’s FPEC, which would have stopped job 
discrimination in the U.S. 

But Sven could afford to be generous. He knew that 
long before his own era, the senator’s side would have 
lost; and Americans of any color would be free to make 
what they might of their lives — until the nuclear attack 
that created Central Authority and deprived everyone, 
equally, of rights. 

Sven found himself looking at the grey-haired black 
man behind the rented bar. He was mixing drinks — the 
picture of wide-eyed, smiling happiness. “Yesah, bos’, 
ladiez,” he boomed, “names yo’ po’sin.” Hiring a black 
man to do work like this always made Sven 
uncomfortable (he knew he had more in common with 
the grinning bartender than the men and women who 
filled his lawn). But the agencies sent blacks, and what 
was he supposed to do ? refuse the man a job? 

“I was up before the Loyalty Board,” a hulking man 
explained to Sven’s neighbor, Gregory, as they 




12 



GALAXY 



approached, boilermakers in hand. “But I proved it was a 
snafu — they wanted James Lee Carmichael and not 
James Henry. It was close — even a rumor could ruin 
Capital Airlines.” 

Sven drained his screwdriver, forking slabs of ribs 
on their plates. “You’re a great guy, Sven,” Gregory 
burbled. “Isn’t he, Slim?” 

“A great guy,” Slim agreed. They were both a bit 
drunk. Sven was a bit drunk too. 

Gazing out over his well-trimmed, orderly lawn, the 
well-dressed men and women who filled it, the secure, 
sprawling house beyond them (a product of the building 
boom remaking the face of the nation) — Sven heaved a 
contented sigh. He had only arrived in this era five years 
earlier, at the end of the war, but he had been here long 
enough to know that this was the best of all possible 
worlds — and the best of all possible times. 

“You’ve been gone, Owen, you don’t know what’s 
going on.” It was Gregory’s older brother, Joe, the 
journalist. “The government is riddled with communists 
and communist sympathizers. Explain this: in forty-five 
we had won the war and made the world safe for 
Democracy. We were the most powerful nation on Earth 
— two years later half the globe is groaning under Soviet 
tyranny — while the Brits, the Wops, and the Frogs are 
going Red. How come?” 

The speaker took a pull from a frosted glass, and 
poked the other in the chest. “We gave it away — 
somebody gave it away. And they gave it away at Yalta.” 

“There wasn’t any sellout, Joe,” his rabbity, 
mustached companion protested (Sven thought he was 
from the State Department), taking a pull from his own 
drink. “I should know. It was a series of bad decisions 
and misestimations of Russian intent. Roosevelt was 
dying — he only lived two months. Besides, we couldn’t 
have pacified the world — there are too many hot spots. 
Let the Russians try.” 

“Are you nuts?” Gregory’s eldest brother said, 
wiping eggsalad from his tie. “Overnight the number 
under Communist domination increased from 
200,000,000 to 800,000,000. That’s more than 
coincidence and bad decisions.” 

Sven smiled, slathering sauce on the ribs — the 
strains of “Scarlet Ribbons” wafting from a radio. The 
politics of this era seemed so innocent. Only a few 
thousands had been summoned before loyalty boards — 
in the twenty-sixties review was a monthly routine. In 
the fifties, all the real problems lay in distant lands. No 
one who acted intelligently could get hurt — not here in 
the midst of the United States, with its mighty defenses 
to protect them. He felt secure, knowing history had 
turned out no other way. 

“ Experts believe Soviet accusation of spying against 
the Yugoslavian Ambassador may be the pretext for 
direct military intervention. ” The radio was on for the 
Navy-Penn State scores. “On the domestic scene, 
Secretary of State Acheson said we should welcome any 
Soviet proposal for atomic control. Railroads canceled 



six hundred train runs today as the lengthening coal 
strike brought U.S. fuel stocks to a historic low. 
Meanwhile, the deadlocked steel strike has hit industrial 
production and the economy hard. ” 

“Acheson ’s either a Red — or a fairy,” someone 
spat. 

Sven looked for JoAnn, didn’t see her — and felt a 
pang. He’d come to like her very much in the two years 
since they had met and married — she had an uncanny 
way of almost reading his mind. A quiet, composed 
woman, who said little and thought much, she had been 
working as a stenographer in the D.O.A. — but she was 
an orphan, thrust on relatives all her life, and wanted a 
home of her own. JoAnn had been the one to suggest she 
quit work to become a homemaker. 

“Sven — ” Gregory’s twelve year-old, Timmy, stared 
up through his glasses. “My dad says come meet 
someone.” 

Sven followed the Alsop boy across the grass. 

“These strikes are Soviet inspired,” a voice said. 

“Bull, it’s the same as the Twenties. Profits have 
soared since the War — but not wages. They had to 
strike.” 

“Have you read the first part of the Heinlein serial in 
the new Astounding ?” Timmy’s eyes glittered behind his 
lenses. “Neat, huh?” He was a science fiction buff. 

“It starts off with a bang, anyway.” Sven was a buff, 
too. Optimistic stories of the future made him laugh — 
but also seemed to pull him into the page, into the distant 
stars — - where the shadow of Central Authority was 
unknown. 

“Must be a mutant story like ‘In Hiding.’” Timmy 
said. 

“Looks like it.” Sven envied how easy Heinlein’s 
superman hero made escaping a world’s security forces 
seem. 

Timmy was earnest. “Sometimes I feel I’m a 
mutant.” 

“So do I,” Sven replied. “So do I.” 

“Bette Davis just married her fourth husband.” It was 
Senator Humphrey’s wife. “Or was it the third?” 

“There’s my dad,” Timmy pointed. 

A group of men were packed around a figure holding 
court from Sven’s lawnchairs. Gregory Alsop, standing 
by his younger brother, Stewart, another journalist, 
beckoned Sven. 

The junior senator from California was arguing with 
a man in a brown suit who sprawled back lazily on the 
lawnchair. The man had a highball, a cigarette, and an 
easy-going, genial laugh. 

“Nuts — you’ve all got a phobia about the Reds, 
Dick,” the man said, jowls swelling in a grin. 
“Communists have the same right to vote as anyone else, 
don’t they? They got me elected. And I happen to think 
Stalin’s proposal for world disarmament is a great 
thing.” 

The man drained his highball and laughed again. His 
eyes, almost as slanted as Sven’s own, crinkled in 



RECKLESS 



13 



genuine merriment. Everyone laughed with him — he 
had spoken with such evident insincerity — even Nixon 
joined in. 

“Sven,” Gregory said, “meet the man the 
Washington press corps voted ‘The Worst Senator on 
Capitol Hill.’” The man in the lawnchair laughed along 
with everyone else. “Tail-gunner, meet my neighbor, 
Sven. It’s his party.” 

“Great shindig, Sven,” Tail-gunner waved his glass. 

The screendoor banged, and the senator from 
Massachusetts emerged, straightening his tie. “’Lo, Joe,” 

he gave a toothy smile. “How’s tricks?” 

* 

“Why did they vote you Worst Senator?” Sven said, 
working on a screwdriver and a Pall Mall (“filters the 
smoke further and makes it mild”). 

Tail-gunner laughed, took a swig from his highball 
and waved his cigarette-hand modestly. 

It was a week later, and the party was at Gregory 
Alsop’s. A blizzard blanketed the East, and everyone 
was gathered inside the statistician’s home. 

The youngest Alsop brother, debonair in a white, 
single-breasted suit, took a puff and began: “Could’ve 
been when the Pepsi-Cola lobbyist was covering 
Tailer-gunner’s gambling losses. They wanted sugar 
rationing lifted — so Tail-gunner up and lied to the 
Senate. Told ’em the D.O.A. had found 800,000 surplus 
tons — almost won the vote. Or could’ve been when 
Tail-gunner was close to a rich former Bund-supporter 
and championed Nazi officers who massacred captured 
U.S. troops.” 

“What?” Sven gasped. 

Tail-gunner shrugged. “Lots of Germans in my state 
thought those boys were railroaded by vengeful Jews.” 

“You should have seen him brow-beat the Army 
attorneys that jailed those Nazis,” Stewart was admiring. 
“Or it could’ve been when Stranlund, the construction 
king, was covering his losses. Stranlund opposed 
subsidized housing for returning vets — so Tail-gunner 
read the Senate a government report supporting his view. 
He made it up, too.” 

Joe laughed with everyone else. Then he lit a 
cigarette, holding out his glass for a refill. A rumpled 
man bounced up and carried it to the bar. The same black 
man from the agency was mixing drinks with the same 
big-eyed friendly smile. (Sven had tried to talk to him 
after the party at his house — but all he had gotten was 
some bowing, scraping and a few ‘Sho’ ’nough bos’es. 
What else had he expected? What was there to say?) 

“I was taught to fight by Injun Charlie,” Tail-gunner 
explained. “He said, ‘Hit them in the groin — and keep 
hitting and hitting and hitting.’” (Everyone laughed.) 

Sven saw JoAnn with a group of women (he had lost 
sight of her earlier) and excused himself. 

“State Department’s about to fire more than two 
hundred as ‘undesirable’ for security reasons,” someone 
said. 

JoAnn stood by the picture-window with three other 



women — as usual a silent participant smoking Kools, 
intense interest on her serene, sympathetic face. 

“A white woman who marries an African prince has 
an abnormal mind,” Mrs. Rankin declared, sipping her 
Collins. 

The wife of the senator from Massachusetts smiled 
over her martini: “I think she’s as courageous as any 
soldier.” 

As Sven approached, JoAnn reached back to touch 
his face — seeming to sense his presence. “Dear Sven.” 
Her dark eyes were filled with fondness so intense it was 
disturbing. “We’re talking about Ruth Khama.” 

“She must love Prince Khama very much,” Belinda 
added. 

Sven decided he needed a refill, and threaded his 
way through the hot, smoky room toward the bar. 

“ — Urey, the guy that helped develop the bomb 
says the Reds will pass us in the atomic bomb race in 
two years.” 

Sven lurched. That drink, he decided, might steady 
him. 

“Alger Hiss, he’s the smoking gun at Yalta.” The 
eldest Alsop, Joe, and the rabbity, mustached man were 
at the bar. 

“Hiss was Oliver Wendell Holmes’ clerk,” the man 
from D.O.S. insisted. “Frankfurter talked him into 
government work. Dulles put him in the Carnegie 
Endowment for Peace. Are they Reds?” 

“Yez seh, bos’,” the bartender gave Sven the same 
big smile. “Mo’ th’ same?” Sven nodded. 

Joe poked the man in the chest, firing a question. 
“The about-face Hiss did on knowing Chambers?” 

“Hiss’d known Chambers decades before — when 
he recognized him — Hiss said so.” 

“The Pumpkin Papers, Owen?” thumping his friend 
again. 

“Forged. Chambers denied Hiss was involved in 
spying — then when it was time to provide evidence 
Hiss committed an actual crime or face libel and perjury 
charges himself — Chambers produces documents he’s 
‘hidden’ for twenty years.” 

“The Woodstock typewriter, Owen?” the journalist 
asked. 

Both men signaled for refills — the man behind the 
bar obliging with a big, broad smile. “Proves Hiss 
innocent. The FBI spent months searching for it — the 
Hisses find it in Baltimore and notify the FBI. Would a 
Soviet spy do that?” 

“The FBI matched the Pumpkin Papers with its 
typeface.” 

“Planted,” the little man said. “Hiss’ new lawyer 
found serial numbers that prove that typewriter wasn’t 
manufactured until two months after the Pumpkin Papers 
were typed.” 

Joe, a former naval pilot, leaned back belligerently. 
“To hear you talk, Owen — there is no Red Menace.” 

Sven didn’t know who was right. The Russians were 
a danger — they’d made that clear. And they had spy 



14 



GALAXY 



systems everywhere, trying to subvert every government 
in sight. But Sven couldn’t believe the U.S. government 
and citizenry were as ripe with Reds, determined to bring 
about a Soviet form of government, as many believed. 

The red-haired senator from Massachusetts appeared 
(Sven didn’t recall seeing him earlier.) “Dick’s getting 
hot,” he told Alsop and the D.O.S. man, sweeping them 
away. 

Sven remained behind, with a screwdriver and a 
Marlboro (“delightfully different”). He had seen a 
woman who looked like Adele, and needed to think. 
Adele was probably alive somewhere. He’d thought of 
her daily — she was the only woman who had seen 
through to the real him. But finding her would hardly be 
fair. Adele would be in her forties now, with a world of 
living — husband, children, 7,000 sunsets and sunrises 

— between them. 

“Red Chinese, ” a radio blared, “drove Nationalist 
forces from Kweilin today — their last stronghold on the 
mainland. Britain ’s Labor Party claimed victory in the 
coming elections and promised total nationalization of 
industry. The continuing U.S. coal strike caused panic in 
the blizzard-struck East as citizens — from Indianapolis 
to Buffalo — remained without coal for the third straight 
day. Secretary Aches on acknowledged Soviet attitudes 
were troublesome, but still spoke of finding common 
ground for agreement. ” 

Sven felt slightly inebriated and motioned for 
another one. “Sho’, bos’,” the bartender’s big eyes 
shone. “Mo’ o’ — ” He glanced around — Sven realized 
they were alone. “Sven — that is what they call you? 
What may it be my pleasure to serve you — another 
screwdriver?” Sven nodded, speechless — had he had 
one too many already? The wide-eyed, happiness had 
vanished with the accent — weary intelligence stared 
from a lined face. 

“I wish to apologize for my rudeness last week. I 
realize you meant no harm,” his eyes looked into Sven’s 
as an equal. “But appearances, you understand — my job 

— regulations forbid fraternizing with guests.” 

Sven nodded again, knowing the real issue that 
divided them. “You sound like a college man,” he said 
finally. 

The weary eyes grew pained. “There’s not much 
work in bio-chemistry for a man of my color. I was 
fortunate to — ” He straightened, eyes wide, smile big 
and happy again. “Yez ladiez, names yo’ po’sin.” 
(“Name’s Andrew,” he whispered.) 

Sven moved away following the sound of ragtime — 
he found the den packed solid. Nixon was on it tonight. 
Finishing with a glissando, he stood and said: “Did you 
hear what the Soviet refugee said to the hooker: ‘I 
thought the fifty dollars was just for the blanket!”’ He 
wagged his head, crying “You ain’t seen nothin’ yet” in 
his best Durante imitation. (Laughter and applause.) 

Sven spotted JoAnn, laughing too, standing next to 
Kennedy on the far side of the den. Sven was thinking it 
was time to go home and that he should fight his way 



through to get her — when Tail-gunner grabbed him. 

“Lend me a hand, Sven.” Tail-gunner pulled him 
into the kitchen — where three men sat around a table. 

Tail-gunner pushed over an ashtray, gave Sven a 
light. “I’m up for election. And — ” an embarrassed grin 
“ — I can’t exactly run on my record. I need an issue to 
bamboozle the voters. Something I can hit at and keep 
hitting at.” 

Tail-gunner drained his highball, pointed with a 
cigarette. “Bob recommends the Saint Lawrence Seaway 
— Charlie, guaranteed pensions for the elderly — but 
neither’s sexy. Father Walsh says fight Reds — but 
people are sick of hearing about Reds.” 

He handed his glass to Charlie. “Maybe a new 
menace? Problem is — in a democracy you can’t use 
Jews or Niggers.” Charlie brought the refill. “Doctors — 
maybe?” Tail-gunner mused. “Bankers — no, they’ve 
got money.” 

“Sven — ” it was Timmy. “Can I borrow Astounding 
to reread ‘Gulf? A friend lost my copy.” 

Father Walsh leaned forward. “What’s that, Tim?” 

“A story about mutants,” the boy said.” 

“Supermen with big IQs — caused by radiation,” 
Sven explained. “You know, science fiction.” 

“Men from Mars?” Bob said blankly. 

“Here’s to Martians,” Tail-gunner raised his glass. 
Sven felt fingers on the back of his neck. “Come 

on,” JoAnn said. “It’s time to go home.” 

* 

“Good evening Mr. and Mrs. America — and all the 
ships at sea, ” Sven could hear the radio over the sounds 
of laughter. “The Soviets warned today against U.S. 
interference in ‘internal Chinese affairs. ’ Secretary 
Acheson went a good way toward total recognition of a 
total enmity between the U.S. and the Soviet Union. 
Nationally: The coal strike continued and temperatures 
remained in the below zero range — Ford announced it 
was laying off all 115,000 workers indefinitely. 
Meanwhile, Senator Kefauver charged that the pending 
Equal Rights Amendment would mean rape was no 
longer a crime, and women would be drafted. ” 

Sven stood in the Nixons’ front hall, lighting a 
Lucky (“L.S./M.F.T.”), and handing his coat to an ebony 
maid. (JoAnn had a late appointment with the hairdresser 
and was joining him when she was finished.) 

In the smoky living room, his host finished a drink 
while turning the radio down. “I’ve got a bet on with 
Tail-gunner,” he explained. 

“Play us something, Dick,” Kennedy said, drink in 
hand. 

Sven saw Pat’s lips purse. “He just got home, let him 
rest,” she interposed. 

“Play ‘Someone to Watch Over Me,”’ Joe Alsop 
insisted, waving a glass. “It was Pappy’s favorite.” 

“Waf, ah don’t know,” Dick joked, doing Jimmy 
Stewart. “But ah rec’on — if you insist. Wal’ 
aw’right.” 

Sven heard laughter from the dining room — 



» 



RECKLESS 



15 



decided it was time for a drink. 

The bar was across a spacious room filled with 
mahogany antiques, smoke and people. 

“If you ask me,” an accented feminine voice was 
saying, “in some ways women are not men’s equal — oh 
no, we are not. In other ways we are their superiors — ” 
(A foreign comedienne, Sven thought) “ — oh yes, their 
superiors.” 

“Men will fight for freedom,” a male voice “ — but 
when they are free and life is easy, the fight goes out of 
them.” 

Sven saw several faces he knew — including the 
black one behind the bar. Sven smoked a cigarette, and 
waited while the crowd thinned out. 

“G’d ev’n’, seh. Names — ” The big, wide-eyed 
smile disappeared — the wise, grizzled face stared out. 
“Sven — you’re no Swede, no matter what they 
think — ” nodding at the crowd. “There’s more than a 
hint of the tarbrush in you. But everyone has secrets — 
and none of us are exactly what we seem.” 

Sven wanted to lean forward and unburden his whole 
story — 2067, CA, the war, ferrets, Thought Police, the 
Temporal Transverter — the dying Swede who’d 
bequeathed his naturalization papers. 

But to speak would risk everything — his house — 
his job — JoAnn — the quiet peace of the fifties. They’d 
think him insane — and if he were believed, he would 
only be burdening the present with the dark shadow of 
the future. 

Yet Sven found he could not lie to those eyes. 
“What’s in a name?” he said, shrugging in 
acknowledgment. Then: “Isn’t there something I can do 
to help you — ” 

The man stepped back and cold, hard pride came 
into his face. His voice stung: “I don’t need — Yez ’em, 
lit’ le lady — ” his head was bobbing “ — names yo’ 
po’sin.” 

“Got a light, stranger?” JoAnn (dark hair piled high, 
a wing beside each ear) bent forward. Sven lit hers and 
his. 

“You weren’t in the living room, so I figured you’d 
be here.” Her eyes smiled at him, serene and tender. 

She sipped her martini. “One of the unmarried girls 
at D.O.A. is preggers. She’ll have to move, of course, 
and make up a dead husband — or face a back-alley 
abortion mill.” 

Once word was out, Sven knew, the woman would 
lose her job and apartment and be ostracized by almost 
everyone, friends included — that was the dark side of 
the fifties. 

There was a long silence. “Have you seen Belinda?” 
Sven finally asked. 

“I’ll find her.” JoAnn rose as if reading his mind. 

When she was gone, Sven realized he had wanted a 
chance to apologize to Andrew — and then, what had 
there been to say to JoAnn? They spent so much time 
together, anyway. 

But Gregory’s older brother and his friend from 



State staggered up to the bar together. “Granted there 
may be one or two Red spies in our government,” the 
small, mustached man said. “We’ve got our own in 
Moscow — but it’s not riddled with them — not enough 
to do real harm. All the spy cases were smoke and no 
fire.” 

Joe poked him in the stomach. “The Amerasia 
magazine case? Jaffee was a friend of Browder, head of 
the U.S. Party — he visited the Red Consulate and met 
with Chinese Reds.” 

The other’s glasses gleamed: “A journalist trying to 
get the big picture — you don’t get it from government 
P.R.” 

“Printing secret D.O.S. China assessments word for 
word, Owen. Filing cabinets crammed with restricted 
documents, including military reports on Chiang 
Kai-shek’s Nationalist army, the Japanese fleet, bombing 
Germany.” 

“There was no evidence information was given to 
the Reds. They were our allies then — and had access to 
all that stuff. The entire case died in court. Besides, what 
spy would steal documents and print them in their 
magazine?” 

“Strings were pulled high up — evidence 
suppressed,” Joe insisted. “Larson confessed later. 
Commies in the government were afraid the truth would 
leak out. You’re defensive because some D.O.S. people 
were implicated.” 

Sven took his screwdriver, looked in the living room 
where Nixon was still playing and clowning. The 
Kennedys were standing together, laughing — JoAnn, by 
the piano, seemed to stare at them. 

“Mr. Sven, here’s your Astounding.' 1 ' Timmy stared 
up. “My dad said you’d be here.” He grew thoughtful. 
“Do you think there really are mutants like Timothy 
Johns and Kettle-belly Baldwin?” 

“The head of Navy atomic research says if war 
comes, we’ll see 15,000,000 U.S. dead the first day,” a 
man said. 

“If they’re like those in ‘Gulf,’ I hope so,” Sven 
replied. He wished some superior force had guided 
humanity past the nuclear winter that was killing off all 
life in his own age. But history could only be changed in 
the minor details — subsequent events always quickly 
worked themselves out so that its basic course remained 
unaltered. 

“I’m not sure Heinlein’s hero was a superman,” 
Timmy said thoughtfully. “He died at the end. A real 
superman would have outsmarted the villain — and 
lived.” 

“The U.S. Commies are moving their headquarters to 
Harlem,” a man said. “That’s no surprise — most of the 
NAACP is Red.” 

* 

“The Red scare’s election propaganda,” their dentist 
neighbor, Peress, replied. “After two decades — 
Republicans were insane to get in office. So they 
branded all Democrats ‘liberals’ and all liberals ‘Red.’ 



16 



GALAXY 



Now the whole country’s a powderkeg — ready to go for 
each other’s throats.” 

By the time Sven had stepped outside for some fresh 
air and a smoke and returned, he found his host, the 
Alsops and several other men gathered around a radio in 
the den. 

“Come in,” Dick said. “Tail-gunner’s gonna lose a 
bet.” 

“With his rep, the Republicans decided to keep him 
low profile,” Stewart explained. “They sent him to 
address a women’s club in Wheeling.” (Everyone 
laughed.) 

“He bet me fifty bucks he’d outfox them and make 
national headlines from Wheeling,” Nixon explained. 

" — Philco, ” the announcer said. "Tonight in 
Wheeling, Senator McCarthy made stunning charges 
that have aroused a firestorm of controversy. Here, via 
transcription — ” 

“Damn,” Nixon said admiringly, “the s.o.b. did it!” 

“ The world is threatened by a sinister conspiracy. ” 
(Everyone laughed.) "That menace has wrecked the 
peace we fought for — plotted the rise of communism — 
undermined our government, economy and way of life — 
and plans to eliminate or enslave every man, woman and 
child on Earth. 

“ Hidden among us are blasphemous mutations — 
spawned by exposure to the atom — whose brains 
possess monstrous intelligence. These mutants — in 
appearance ordinary people — call themselves, Homo 
Novis, the New Men — and are conspiring to replace the 
human race. 

"The existence of a sinister conspiracy of mutants, 
concealed in our midst may sound like science fiction — 
but it’s sober truth.” (“Tail-gunner, sober?” Stewart 
laughed — and was hushed.) “I have here secret D.O.D. 
files documenting this menace. I quote: The intellects of 
Homo Novis are as far beyond Homo Sapiens as the Sun 
is beyond a candle — Homo Sapiens is sure to be 
displaced by New Man. Unquote. 

“I know you ’re asking, ‘If the government knows — 
why doesn 't it act? ’ The proof of these mutants ’power is 
that the government knows — and does nothing. I have 
in my hand a list of 128 of these monsters who have 
plotted war, crime, poverty, communism, racial division 
— names known to the D.O.D. — but who still walk the 
Earth, planning our deaths. 

"The chips are down — the government is in their 
power. The gulf between us and them is narrow — but 
we can never close it. Yet now — while their number is 
small — for our children ’s sake — we can root out and 
destroy them — before it ’s too late. ” (Laughter.) 

“I think 128 is the number of genius-level employees 
in federal government,” Gregory said. 

“I wonder where he got that crazy idea,” Nixon 
laughed. 

“Maybe not so crazy,” someone added. “It explains 



"We interrupt for a statement from Senator 



McCarthy. ” The familiar voice boomed: "Let me thank 
the American people for the telegrams pouring in. Many 
name — or report activities of — the New Men. Most 
asked for the 128 names — but the D.O.D. list is in my 
luggage. ” (“Of course,” Stewart said.) “ However , 1 can 
name one of the ringleaders. This man has degrees from 
Yale, Cambridge and the Sor bonne — an IQ of 250 plus 
— yet he 's disguised himself as a menial. His name is 
Alexander Hamilton Jones — and he 's living in the heart 
of our nation’s government — masquerading as a 
bartender. ” 

Glass shattered. “My god, that’s me!” 

Every eye turned to face the black man in the white 
coat — frozen behind the bar. 

Shit, Sven thought, draining the screwdriver. What 
have I done? Timmy — Tail-gunner — he had crossed 
two wires that should never have touched. What would 
happen next? 

* 

“ You can ’t fight it, Miltie, ” the girl on the flickering 
Magnavox was saying. “It’s bigger than both of us.” 
The star turned to his guests: “Dean, Jerry — help me. 
I’ll do anything. Put a star on your dressing room — ” 
"What dressing room? ” 

Sven took his steak off the Hotpoint, a Pabst from 
the Frigidaire, set both on the table (all their furniture 
was Colonial-style) — and shook an Old Gold (“for a 
treat — instead of a treatment”) from the pack on the 
Maytag. 

“That too. I’ll even pay your salaries. I’ll make it up 
to you some — ” "Make-up? Did someone say 
‘make-up’?" A diminutive figure ran up and smacked 
the star with a huge powderpuff. 

Sven carried his dinner into the living room, and 
settled back in an easy chair. JoAnn was at a Civil 
Defense meeting — so he was ‘batching’ it tonight. 

Dancing cigarettes were replaced by news. "The big 
story — ” the announcer said “ — is the incredible 
public response to Senator McCarthy ’s claim last night 
that a conspiracy of mutants threatens to destroy 
mankind. ” 

Sven had been so busy with problems on the new 
bipolar junction transistor — he had forgotten 
Tail-gunner’s speech. 

“Millions of phone calls, letters and telegrams — 
have flooded the Senate naming teachers, lawyers, 
scientists, authors, Mensa members — as mutants. 
Hundreds have lost jobs and been driven from their 
homes. Communities say they are afraid to take a 
chance. ” 

Sven heard JoAnn open the front door and go in to 
change only dimly — beer and Old Gold were forgotten. 

“A long line of people appeared before the Senator ’s 
committee — ” Photo: Jammed Senate chamber “ — to 
swear they had lost businesses, jobs, promotions, even 
wives to New Men. Farmers testified neighbors who 
prospered while they failed were mutants. Others 
claimed proof of mutant influence on government, 



RECKLESS 



17 



financial and social institutions. ” 

Sven put down his steak untasted, groped blindly and 
lit a second Old Gold. He was numb with shock. It was 
too much like the “Fantasizer” hunts of his own age — 
how he escaped them, he had never known. How many 
sent to the front? How many shipped to labor camps? 

“Grilled by the Senator was Alexander Hamilton 
Jones — an accused mutant leader. ” Film: Tail-gunner’s 
flabby good-humor was now slit-eyed, porcine cruelty. 
“Isn’t it true you think you are better than normal 
people ?” Andrew was sweating. “No. / believe in 
democ — ” “Didn ’t you write ‘Something sets me apart 
from ordinary men ’? ” Andrew looked bewildered. “That 
was a college poem — it was abo — ” Tail-gunner cut 
him off. “And isn ’t it — ” 

“Sven — ” JoAnn stood in the doorway, wearing one 
of the diaphanous housecoats that were the rage — her 
body silhouetted through it by the light behind. A plume 
of smoke trailed from her nostrils; she held a martini in 
one hand. “Sven, I want — ” 

Sven turned to her in anguish. “Have you heard 
about Tail-gunner and this mutant thing? People 
denouncing neighbors — panicked over shadows. It’s 
incredible — it’s terrible — unreal. Can you believe it’s 
happening?” 

JoAnn moved forward, eyes reflective, sad. “If only 
you had said something like that to me earlier. If only 
you had said anything. We went out a lot and you made 
me laugh — when we were dating.” 

Sven cringed inside. It was true — when he had met 
JoAnn, he had known she was a quiet girl. But she had 
reminded him of Adele — and he had gone out of his 
way to charm her interest. After they were married, it 
had been easy to slip back into the habit of silence he’d 
learned during a lifetime under the watchful eye of CA. 

He had wanted her to make an effort to see the real 
him — like Adele, Sven realized. But she wasn’t Adele 
— he had wrecked JoAnn’s life chasing a foolish dream. 
He seemed to wreck everything he touched. 

And yet the night he met her — she had done all the 
talking. “Did you ever wonder why I was so talkative 
that first time?” she said, again seeming to read his 
thoughts. “You were the only person I’d ever met more 
withdrawn than I was. I wanted to bring you out of your 
shell.” 

“I’m sorry,” was all he could say under the crushing 
weight of his wrongs. 

JoAnn came closer — swaying over him. “Sven, I 
— ” There was a plaintive longing he had never heard 
before. 

Bing-bong. The clear, metallic sound froze them — a 
million unspoken thoughts winged along their glance. 

Andrew stood on the porch. His face was no longer 
grizzled — it was aged. His suit was tom and blood was 
seeping from a small cut under one eye. “I have no one 
close in Washington — I had little idea where else 
to — ” 

“Come in.” He hadn’t expected it, but wasn’t 



surprised. 

The living room was empty — JoAnn had gone to 

bed. 

“This is madness.” Andrew’s black face gleaming 
with sweat. “They’re investigating my entire family — 
uncles, aunts, cousins. Half have lost jobs. They have 
normal IQs — but because we’re related, they’re 
suspected of hiding their real IQs.” 

“What will you have to drink?” Sven said (aware of 
the irony) — filling his own glass with Hiram Walker. 

“My brother’s home was burned down.” His eyes 
were haunted, horror-filled. “ — Sorry, don’t drink. 
Thank god they don’t get radio where my mother lives. 
At her age — ” 

Sven drained his screwdriver, refilled the glass and 
lit another Old Gold. He offered the pack to Andrew. 

“The Senator had a list of everyone I ever knew.” 
The laughing face now sagged in despair. “ — Thanks, 
don’t smoke. He asked me if I didn’t think it was funny 
so many had high IQs — or was I pretending I was too 
dumb to see that. He kept hounding at it — hounding.” 

(And Sven had thought their politics harmless!) 

For a moment Andrew’s eyes seemed to cross over 
into madness. “I’m used to taking heat for my color. I’ve 
been jailed in Biloxi and beaten in Boston. But my 
IQ. .” 

Sven could think of nothing to say — he leaned 
forward and put his hand on the man’s knee reassuringly. 

Andrew put his head in his hands. “I never heard of 
the New Men — and tomorrow the Senator says he has a 
witness who can prove I am one. .Oh god, what am I 
going to do?” 

“For one thing,” Sven said, “sleep in the den.” 

At that moment, a heavy, official pounding shook 
the front door. Thought Police! Sven shuddered. Then 
realized CA was far behind (or far ahead). The police of 
this era were saints in comparison — besides, he had 
nothing to fear from them — and it was probably only a 
neighbor. 

But it wasn’t neighbors or the Thought Police on his 
front porch — it was something far more dangerous. A 
sea of faces — sullen, suspicious, threatening, spreading 
into the freezing dark. A few Sven recognized — most 
were strangers. Sven knew — before they said anything 
— why they had come. 

“We saw that mutant guy go in here.” Sven could 
hear their collective sound, a sinister animal rustle. 

Peress, the dentist from across the street, stood 
between a huge man wearing a coat and a sandy-haired 
man with faded eyes. Their breath steamed. 

“What do you want?” Sven shivered in the cold 
playing for time (he had a sick sense of what was to 
come — but no idea what to do). 

“We’re the neighborhood Vigilance Committee,” 
Peress said. “We just want to talk.” 

“Don’t lie,” the sandy-faced man said. “We plan to 
put an end to the danger him and his kind pose to real 
people — and we plan to start now.” 



18 



GALAXY 



The big man moved — his hand held a noosed rope. 

Sven felt that hideous, helpless sense of unreality 
return. This can’t be happening here, he thought. Not in 
the nineteen fifties, in the midst of orderly suburban 
Georgetown — in the Warrens of 2067 — but not here. 

An ugly, menacing growl went up from the crowd. 
“Hang ’im now.” “Quit stalling.” “Bust in.” 

Sven was soaked with sweat despite the cold. 
Whatever happened, it would all be over before the 
police could arrive — if they weren’t sympathetic to the 
committee. Suddenly he was back in the Warrens — and 
midnight visits from the Safety Committees. Sven knew 
what followed. 

He had no intention of giving Andrew up. But he 
couldn’t stop this mob — and there was JoAnn to think 
of. Tail-gunner, damn him, had created this mess (though 
Sven knew this wasn’t true) — Tail-gunner should have 
to fix it. 

Then — standing there in the icy October night, the 
yellow light of the porch lamp casting radiance down 
over a hate-filled world that had seemed so serene only a 
few hours ago — Sven saw how Tail-gunner might “fix” 
the situation, after all. 

“You don’t understand,” Sven announced. “I’m a 
friend of the Senator’s. This man is in my custody to 
make sure he’s at the hearing. .You boys don’t want to 
get me — or yourselves — in dutch with Congress.” 

The sandy-haired man frowned. The big man 
growled: “How do we know — ” 

“It’s true,” Peress said. “I’ve seen Tail-gunner here.” 

“Want to come in and phone the Senator?” 
Tail-gunner would probably like the idea of Andrew 
being in his “custody.” 

“Naw, that’s okay,” the sandy-haired man said. “We 
don’t want trouble with Congress — that’s the Justice 
Department. If he’s under detention — that’s different.” 

He turned to the crowd. “It’s okay, men. This man’s 
working for Tail-gunner Joe. The mutant’s his prisoner.” 

Sven sighed in relief. He had dealt with a minor 
crisis — the major was yet to come. How was he to help 
Andrew — and the others — and undo the damage he 
had caused? 

* 

Sven and Andrew sat facing Tail-gunner in a vast, 
smoky chamber packed with spectators, reporters — and 
witnesses eager to testify to the existence of mutants. 
Sven saw Joe Alsop scribbling notes, Senator Rankin, 
the junior senator from California with Mrs. Kennedy — 
and JoAnn, squeezed between Peress and an elderly 
woman in a veiled hat. 

Throughout the morning Andrew’s teachers, 
schoolmates and friends had been quizzed about his 
brilliance and behavior. Many believed these were so 
unusual they could only be explained by mutation. Those 
who did not, received a merciless verbal beating. 
“Andy’s bright,” said his fifth grade teacher, “but he’s no 
more — ” Tail-gunner: “Didn’t you say he could ‘almost 
read’ your mind?” “I only meant — ” Tail-gunner: 



“Didn’t you once ask how ‘a woman like that could 
produce a child like Andy’?” “Yes, but — ” Tail-gunner: 
“That’s all.” 

Now, with the groundwork out of the way, 
Tail-gunner sprang his key witness. “Will William W. 
Williams take his place before this hearing, please.” 

A dapper, medium-sized black man in a silky grey 
suit strode up, was sworn in, and sat down before a 
microphone. 

(“My god,” Andrew whispered. “That’s Weasel 
Willy — he’ll do anything for money.”) 

“Now Mr. Williams,” Tail-gunner, was his genial, 
easy-going self, “when did you first hear of the New 
Men?” 

Williams squirmed in his chair. “I guess ’bout — 
jus’ befo’ the war. They ’vited me ta join count’a Ize so 
smart.” (Sven waited for the laughter — surely people 
could tell how ridiculous this was.) 

“And just what were the aims of the New Men, Mr. 
Williams?” Tail-gunner purred. 

“They waz a secret organization that was 
super-smart ’cause their fo’ks waz hit by x-rays. They 
waz gonna ’sterminate reg’lar fo’ks and take over the 
world.” 

An audible gasp ran around the room. Satisfaction 
narrowed Tail-gunner’s eyes. 

“And who were the leaders of the New Men?” 

“Ize don’ know all of ’ems — but I do know one — 
and thair he sits — Mr. Andrew Jacks’n Jones.” 

Even though it was what everyone had been 
expecting — the chamber broke into commotion: 
flashbulbs popped, reporters dashed for phones, the 
chairman pounded for order. 

“Now,” the clerk announced, “will Mr. Andrew 
Jackson Jones take his place before this hearing.” 

Andrew complied — looking sober and responsible 
in a brown suit and tie. 

Again, Tail-gunner’s whole demeanor changed in an 
instant. His eyes became pockets of malice, his fleshy 
face brutal, coarse. “Mr. Jones, let’s go back to the 
question.” 

“According to committee rules,” Andrew 
interrupted, “I’m allowed to read an opening state — ” 
“You don’t need an opening statement,” Tail-gunner 
cut in. “Just answer one question.” 

“I want to read — ” 

“Just answer ‘yes’ or ‘no’: how do you explain — ” 
“I am not now — and never have been a member of 
the New Men — nor had I ever heard of the New Men 
until — ” 

“Mr. Jones. Mr. Jones. Answer this question. You 
are ordered to answer this question — or I am going to 
keep you here as long as it takes.” 

Andrew, wearily: “All right — what is your 
question?” 

“Your parents and relatives are normal. How do you 
account for your IQ — if you aren’t a mutant? Do you 
know the odds against someone having an IQ like yours 



RECKLESS 



19 



naturally are more than one in one billion?” 

“Senator many people with high IQs are born to — ” 
“Just answer my question.” 

Andrew frowned. “What question?” 

Tail-gunner sneered: “Don’t tell me that someone 
with an IQ as large as yours — can’t understand a simple 
question — ” Sneeringly: “But I’ll repeat it: if you are 
not a mutant — how do you explain your billion-to-one 
IQ?” 

Andrew looked around, desperate, pleading — 
surely, his eyes said, everyone must see the absurdity of 
this. “I — I can’t, Senator. No one can explain why — ” 
“You can’t explain it — that’s all.” Tail-gunner 
wheeled, strode to his table, picked up a folder, whirled 
accusingly. “Now let’s take the matter of your disguise.” 
“Senator, I was never disguised — ” 

“Mr. Jones — your vitae: Degree in Chemistry, 
Sorbonne 1938; Biochemistry, Cambridge, 1947. Grants 
and fellowships from the Ford Foundation, the Carnegie 
Institute, etc.” Tail-gunner paused. “Is that accurate?” 
“Yes. ..but— ” 

Tail-gunner snapped the folder shut. “Yet, we find 
you pretending to be a bartender — affecting the accent 
of an ignorant coon — and you don’t call that a 
disguise?” 

“Senator,” desperately, “I needed a job — ” 
Tail-gunner turned in a fury. “Are you saying a man 
with your credentials can’t get a better job than bartender 
in the U.S. of A. —just because of his color?” 

Too late Andrew — and Sven — saw Tail-gunner’s 
trap. Whichever answer Andrew gave — he alienated the 
public and the papers. “I. .Senator this is craz — ” 

Tail-gunner, boring in: “Are you aware that the 
Daily Worker , the organ of the Communist Party, says 
that black men are denied opportunity in America. 

. .You don’t endorse the official position of the 
Communist Party — do you?” 

Andrew, indignantly: “Of course not — ” 

“Which is it, Mr. Jones? Are you a mutant — or a 
Red?” 

Andrew licked his lips and looked around 
appealingly. “1 — this is ridic — ” 

Tail-gunner towered above him, thundering. “Are 
you a mutant — or a Red, Mr. Jones — answer the 
question!” 

Andrew’s eyes moved wildly seeking a way out — 
but there was none. 

Tail-gunner’s voice lisped with vituperative malice. 
“A mutant — or a Red? ” he shouted. 

The farce had gone far enough, Sven thought. He 
might have waited too long already. 

“Tail-gunner — ” Sven tapped the microphone, his 
words echoing around him. “ — Tail-gunner? Can I say 
something?” 

In one of those baffling changes of mood, 
Tail-gunner laughed. “Sure, Sven — go ahead. We’re 
drinking buddies.” 

Sven beckoned — JoAnn led the veiled, elderly 



woman up. 

“This,” Sven announced, sweaty, faint and sick 
under the lights — aware of the million eyes upon him 
— “is Mrs. Eulalie Jones.” The wrinkled black woman 
unpinned her hat and veil. “Mrs. Jones is eighty-seven 
and the mother of Andrew Jackson Jones. She has never 
left Chester Gap, West Virginia before — and has never 
been exposed to radiation.” 

“Thayt’s ri’,” the faint voice wavered. “Andy’s ma 
boy — an’ Ah nev’r ben nair this heir radimation.” 

Again flashbulbs popped, reporters scurried to the 
phones — and the spectators were gaveled into silence. 

“That’s a lie!” Tail-gunner shouted, waving a fistful 
of papers. “ — This woman’s no more his mother than I 
am.” 

The woman staggered, every eye on her. 

“Mr. Jones’ real mother is Hazel Jones of 
Greensboro,” Tail-gunner stalked forward, glaring 
“ — and she was X-rayed for a broken bone six months 
before Andrew was bom. This woman — ” he pointed 
and she took a trembling step back “ — is a fake — and 
a former streetwalker. And I have copies of her birth 
certificate to prove it!” Tail-gunner thundered — shaking 
the papers in her face. 

The woman’s watery eyes blinked — her mouth 
opened — she seemed to be trying to speak. Suddenly 
her eyes rolled upward — Sven’s hand stretched out, 
JoAnn moved forward — but before anyone could reach 
her — she gave way at the knees like a doll. 

Reporters and photographers rushed forward. 

Tail-gunner, for once — was caught totally by 
surprise. 

Sven snatched the papers from Tail-gunner’s hand, 
scanned them quickly. “Senator — ” Sven held the 
papers where everyone could see “ — it might interest 
people to know this is nothing more than a series of 
unpaid laundry bills — ” Sven thrust them into the hands 
of several reporters. “And this woman — as you very 
well know — is Andrew Jackson Jones’s mother — she 
has never been exposed to radiation — Mr. Jones is no 
mutant — there is no mutant conspiracy — it’s an idea 
you got from Timmy Alsop while drunk.” 

Tail-gunner had turned his back to Sven and begun 
to rummage through a briefcase. 

Sven leaned closer to the microphone — he wanted 
Tail-gunner to hear every word — he wanted everyone 
to hear. “Tail-gunner, until this moment, I think I never 
really gauged your cruelty or your recklessness. Little 
did I dream that you could be so low as to do an injury to 
that saintly grandmother. Have you no sense of decency. 
Tail-gunner? At long last — have you no sense of 
decency left? If she lives — she and her son — and 
thousands of others — will always bear a scar — 
needlessly inflicted by you. If it lay in my power to 
forgive you — I would. But your forgiveness will have 
to come from a higher power. Let us trouble these two no 
further, Tail-gunner — you’ve done enough.” 

Every eye turned upon the junior senator from 



20 



GALAXY 



Wisconsin — and there was scorn and disapproval in 
every eye. Then the room exploded in a frenzy. 

That, for Sven, was luckiest of all. 

No one heard Andrew, kneeling over his mother, hiss 
coldly at Sven: “How could you, you son-of — ” 

Or saw one eye open in that wrinkled face as she 
whispered. “Hush up, Andy. White folks ain’t the only 
one’s can pull th’ flim-flam.” 

CODA 

Tail-gunner showed up at his barbecue the next 
weekend. Sven couldn’t believe it when he heard the 
familiar, genial, laugh coming from his den. 

Sven set his drink aside, ground out his cigarette, 
handed his spatula to a surprised Humphrey, and stalked 
out of the kitchen. (He had no idea until later that he was 
shaking and white with rage.) 

He seemed to be moving through a smoky, unreal 
world of reckless conversation. 

“We’re a welfare state. People are against it for 
others — but they want that pension, crop support, 
subsidy, scholarship or grant for themselves.” 

“First China — then Korea — then Viet Nam or 
Thailand — they’ll fall like dominos if we don’t do 
something.” 

Every step of the way Sven could feel his rage at the 
fifties building. They appeared so orderly, bland, serene 
on the surface — but beneath that surface was all the 
greed, heedlessness and cruelty that underlay the 
twenties, his own time, and all the other ages of 
humanity. If it weren’t for JoAnn, there would be 
nothing to hold him here. 

“I’ve just read the preliminary Congressional report 
on subversion in government. Out of the millions whose 
files were combed and the thousands who were grilled, 
only seventy-five were ever accused of Communist 
activities. Only two were brought to trial.” 

“In a hardening of attitude, Secretary Acheson 
announced a state of “Cold War" exists between the 
U.S. and Russia. Factories across the nation began to 
close today as the coal strike continued. United Mine 
Workers head , John L. Lewis, refused to predict when 
the strike might end. Miners have remained on strike, 
defying courts and Lewis himself. ” 

Sven came on the target of his anger the way he had 
the first time: Tail-gunner was holding court behind a 
laughing crowd of men, lounging in one of Sven’s 
chairs. 

“Yo’ sho’ took a beatin’ in the papers this morning,” 
Rankin was saying. 

“Did you see the Washington Post ?” Someone 
whistled. 

Tail-gunner laughed without embarrassment, 
gesturing with a cigarette as he drained a highball. “I 
wouldn’t call it a vote of confidence — but I don’t feel 
I’ve been lynched.” 

“Reds. You should have gone after those atheists,” 



Father Walsh interrupted. “China didn’t fall by accident. 
The same State Department traitors who betrayed us at 
Yalta — betrayed China. The whole D.O.S. is Red. 
Someone has to root them out before the whole world 
ends up Red.” 

Sven strode through the crowd, opened his mouth — 

“Hi Sven,” Tail-gunner’s eyes crinkled in genuine 
delight. “I’ve been wondering when you would come by. 
What the hell are you trying to do — avoid me?” 

Sven stood there for a moment — feeling like a fool. 
What was there he could say to a man like this? 
Tail-gunner was as unaware of his own cruelty or the 
pain others suffered as if he were an inhuman mutant 
himself. Whatever Sven said would roll off 
Tail-gunner’s back with that easy, liquored laugh. 

As for the others, what could he tell them? That they 
were children playing with matches — worrying over all 
the wrong dangers while America headed straight down 
the crapper? 

Sven turned on his heel — and walked away. 

Tail-gunner’s response confirmed everything Sven 
believed. “What’s eating him?” Tail-gunner said. 

Sven went toward the house. 

“Don’t you get it, Joe?” the rabbity man was saying, 
“Chambers, Larsen and Elizabeth Bentley — they were 
all paid informers.” 

Joe looked up, gritted his teeth. “Owen, no agency of 
the American government would ever sink that low. The 
practice of putting political informers on government 
payrolls has been condemned since Tacitus. As 
turncoats, their characters are suspect — and what 
happens when they have told all they know but want to 
continue their income?” 

Owen laughed, tossed back a highball. 

“Oh, well, it’s something you’ll never have to worry 
about,” Joe said. “Everyone knows the Lattimores are 
okay.” 

“Hey, Sven. .” 

He was in no mood to talk to anyone. He needed to 
be alone — to think. The party could get along without 
him for a while. 

“What do you know about the spy trials and loyalty 
boards? Peress says it’s a Republican plot to discredit the 
Democrats and purge government and schools of those 
with opposing political views. He says the monied 
interests that run the country panicked when the 
depression revealed their financial misdealings, and 
Roosevelt was elected to curb them. He says their 
newspapers and magazines set out to smear FDR by 
branding his policies “socialism” and “communism” — 
and those who supported him as secret Bolsheviks. They 
started a campaign based not on acts — but treason; not 
on deeds — which are subject to proof or disproof — but 
on predilections of the mind. For what traitor would 
admit his treason? So we came to depend on the turncoat 
who had been inside the conspiracy, supposedly 
discovered conscience, and decided to tell all — 
truthfully, of course. He says that in its entire history, the 



RECKLESS 



21 



Un-American Activities Committee grilled thousands of 
supposed Reds, but never a single Nazi. .What do you 
think?” 

“It would explain why all our allies are right-wing 
dictators.” 

As Sven opened the bedroom door he bumped into 
JoAnn. She was tucking her blouse inside her skirt, and 
adjusting a bra strap — her hair was disheveled, she was 
breathing hard. The bed beyond her was dented. 

Her eyes met his. 

They both knew what had happened. In a way, Sven 
felt relieved. He had no more ties left to this era — he 
could leave without guilt. 

“Oh Sven — ” she said, reaching out to touch his 
cheek. “Poor Sven. I didn’t mean for you to find out this 
way — but I want a divorce.” 

“Who is it?” 

Sven’s mind flashed back over the last few weeks — 
reviewed who had been where when. “Kennedy,” he 
said. “The senator from Massachusetts?” 

JoAnn laughed. “John Kennedy? Good god, no. He’s 
too stuck on himself.” 

Sven frowned. Who?” 

“Dick,” she said it as if it ought to be obvious. 

“Nixon?” he said incredulously. “Why?” 

“He makes me laugh,” she said simply. 

Sven had been right. There was no place for hi 
here any more. No place for him anywhere — i 



anywhen. Just by being here he had brought two 
elements together that would never otherwise have met 
— and the results had been disaster. 

Sven slipped out of the house, moved toward the 
garage. The Transverter was there. He had no idea where 
he was going. He only knew he could remain here no 
longer. 

“Governor Talmadge declared Georgia will fight the 
suit by Negro parents under the 14th Amendment to 
equalize education in the state’s schools. Following 
successful convictions of the top ten of the U.S. 
Communist Party, Attorney General McGrath indicted 
officers of Amtorg Trading, Russia ’s purchasing agency 
in this country, for failure to register as foreign agents. ” 

“Security must,” Sven heard someone say as he 
slipped out the gate, “be one object of a good society but 
other and more important objects are productivity, 
excellence, creativeness, adventure, honor and the 
chance to take a chance.” 

— JEAN MARIE STINE 

AUTHOR’S NOTE: This story is dedicated to: 
Sturgeon, Gold, Costello, and Tail-gunner Joe. Sven, 
JoAnn, Gregory, Belinda and Timmy Alsop, Andrew 
Jackson Jones, Weasel Willy, and of course Eulalie 
Jones are fictional. As usual all other characters are real, 
and do and speak exactly as they did. Most other 
dialogue is paraphrased from publications of the period. 




H.HKATHKR KDKLMAN 
GALLKRY 




386 W. Broadway, NYC 
212/226-2943 




22 



GALAXY 






ME AND MY SHADOW 



23 



ME AND MY 
SHADOW 

By MIKE RESNICK 

Illustrated by Metzger 

t all began when — 

No. Strike that. 

I don’t know when it all began. Probably I never 

will. 

But it began the second time when a truck backfired 
and I hit the sidewalk with the speed and grace of an 
athlete, which surprised the hell out of me since I’ve 
been a very wwathletic businessman ever since the day I 
was born — or born again, depending on your point of 
view. 

I got up, brushed myself off, and looked around. 
About a dozen pedestrians (though it felt like a hundred) 
were staring at me, and I could tell what each of them 
was thinking: Is this guy just some kind of nut, or has he 
maybe been Erased? And if he’s been Erased, have I 
ever met him before? Do I owe him? 

Of course, even if we had met before, they couldn’t 
recognize me now. I know. I’ve spent almost three years 
trying to find out who I was before I got Erased — but 
along with what they did to my brain, they gave me a 
new face and wiped my fingerprints clean. I’m a brand 
new man: two years, eleven months, and seventeen days 
old. I am (fanfare and trumpets, please!)***William 
Jordan***. Not a real catchy name. I’ll admit, but it’s the 
only one I’ve got these days. 

I had another name once. They told me not to worry 
about it, that all my memories had been expunged and 
that I couldn’t dredge up a single fact no matter how 
hard I tried, not even if I took a little Sodium-P from a 
hypnotist, and after a few weeks passed I had to agree 
with them — which didn’t mean that I stopped trying. 

Erasures never stop trying. 

Maybe the doctors and technicians at the Institute are 
right. Maybe I’m better off not knowing. Maybe the 
knowledge of what I did would drive the new improved 
me to suicide. But let me tell you: whatever I did, 
whatever any of us did (oh, yes, I speak to other 
Erasures; we spend a lot of time hanging around the 
newstape morgues and Missing Persons Bureaus and 
aren’t all that hard to spot), it would be easier to live 
with the details than the uncertainty. 

Example: 

“Good day to you, Madam. Lovely weather we’re 
having. Please excuse a delicate inquiry, but did I rape 
your infant daughter four years ago? Sodomize your 
sons? Slit your husband open from crotch to chin? Oh, 
no reason in particular; I was just curious.” 



Do you begin to see the problem? 

Of course, they tell us that we’re special, that we’re 
not simply run-of-the-mill criminals and fiends; the jails 
are full of them. 

Ah, fun and games at the Institute! It’s quite an 
experience. 

We cherish your individuality, they say as they 
painfully extract all my memories'. (Funny: the pain 
lingers long after the memories are gone.) 

Society needs men with your drive and ambition, 
they smile as they shoot about eighteen zillion volts of 
electricity through my spasmodically-jerking body. 

You had the guts to buck the system, they point out 
as they shred my face and give me a new one. 

With drive like yours there ’s no telling how far you 
can go now that we ’ve imprinted a new personality and a 
new set of ethics onto that magnificent libido, they agree 
as they try to decide whether to school me as a kennel 
attendant or perhaps turn me into an encyclopedia 
salesman. (They compromise and metamorphose me into 
an accountant.) 

You lucky man, you ’ve got a new name and face and 
memories and five hundred dollars in your pocket and 
you 've still got your drive and ambition, they say as they 
excruciatingly insert a final memory block. 

Now go out and knock them dead, they tell me. 

Figuratively speaking, they add hastily. 

Oh, one last thing, they say as they shove me out the 
door of the Institute. We’re pretty busy here, William 
Jordan, so don t come back unless it ’s an emergency. A 
BONA FIDE emergency. 

“But where am I to go?” I ask. “What am I to do?” 

You’ll think of something, they assure me. After all. 
you had the brains and guts to buck our social system. 
Boy, do we wish we were like you! Now beat it; we ’ve 
got work to do — or do you maybe think you ’re the only 
antisocial misanthrope with delusions of grandeur who 
ever got Erased? 

And the wild part is that they were right: most 
Erasures make out just fine. Strange as it sounds, we 
really do have more drive than the average man, the guy 
who just wants to hold off his creditors until he retires 
and his pension comes through. We’ll take more risks, 
make quicker decisions, fight established trends more 
vigorously. We’re a pretty gritty little group, all right — 
except that none of us knows why he was Erased. 

In fact, I didn’t have my first hint until the truck 
backfired. (See, I’ll bet you thought 1 had forgotten all 
about it. Not a chance, friend. Erasures don’t forget 
things — at least, not once they’ve left the Institute. 
What most Erasures do is spend vast portions of their 
new lives trying to remember things. Futilely.) 

Well, my memory may have been wiped clean, but 
my instincts were still in working order, and what they 
told me was that I was a little more used to being shot at 
than the average man on the street. Not much to go on, to 
be sure, but at least it implied that the nature of my sin 
leaned more toward physical violence than, say, Wall 




24 



GALAXY 



Street tycoonery with an eye toward sophisticated fraud. 

So I went to the main branch of the Public Library, 
rented a quarter of an hour on the Master Computer, and 
started popping in the questions. 

LIST ALL CRIMINALS STANDING SIX FEET 
TWO INCHES WHO WERE APPREHENDED AND 
CONVICTED IN NEW YORK CITY BETWEEN 2008 
A.D. AND 2010 A.D. 

‘“CLASSIFIED. 

That wasn’t surprising. It had been classified that 
last fifty times I had asked. But, undaunted (Erasures are 
rarely daunted), I continued. 

LIST ALL MURDERS COMMITTED BY PISTOL 
IN NEW YORK CITY BETWEEN 2008 A.D. AND 
2010 A.D. 

The list appeared on the screen, sixty names per 
second. 

STOP. 

The computer stopped, while I tried to come up with 
a more limiting question. 

WITHOUT REVEALING THEIR IDENTITIES, 
TELL ME HOW MANY CRIMINALS WERE 
CONVICTED OF MULTIPLE PISTOL MURDERS IN 
NEW YORK CITY BETWEEN 2008 A.D. AND 2010 
A.D. 

‘“CLASSIFIED. Then it burped and added: NICE 
TRY, THOUGH. 

THANK YOU. HAS ANY ERASURE EVER 
DISCOVERED EITHER HIS ORIGINAL IDENTITY 
OR THE REASON HE WAS ERASED? 

NOT YET. 

DOES THAT IMPLY IT IS POSSIBLE? 

NEGATIVE. 

THEN IT IS IMPOSSIBLE? 

NEGATIVE. 

THEN WHAT THE HELL DID YOU MEAN? 

ONLY THAT NO IMPLICATION WAS 
INTENDED. 

I checked my wristwatch. Five minutes left. 

I AM AN ERASURE, I began. 

I WOULD NEVER HAVE GUESSED. 

Just what I needed — sarcasm from a computer. 
They’re making them too damned smart these days. 

RECENTLY I REACTED INSTINCTIVELY TO A 
SOUND VERY SIMILAR TO THAT MADE BY A 
PISTOL BEING FIRED, ALTHOUGH I HAD NO 
CONSCIOUS REASON TO DO SO. WOULD THAT 
IMPLY THAT GUNFIRE PLAYED AN IMPORTANT 
PART IN MY LIFE PRIOR TO THE TIME I WAS 
ERASED? 

“‘CLASSIFIED. 

CLASSIFIED, NOT NEGATIVE? 

THAT IS CORRECT. 

I got up with three minutes left on my time. 

My next stop was Doubleday’s on Fifth Avenue. The 
sign in the window boasted half a million microdots per 
cubic yard, which meant that they had one hell of a 
collection of literature crammed into their single 



ten-by-fifty-foot aisle. 

I went straight to the True Crime section, but gave 
up almost immediately when I saw the sheer volume of 
True Crime that occurred each and every day in 
Manhattan. 

I called in sick, then hunted up a shooting gallery in 
the vidiphone directory. I made an appointment, rode the 
Midtown slidewalk up to the front door, rented a pistol, 
and went downstairs to the soundproofed target range in 
the basement. 

It took me a couple of minutes to figure out how to 
insert the ammunition clip, an inauspicious beginning. 
Then I hefted the gun, first in one hand and then the 
other, hoping that something I did would feel familiar. 
No luck. I felt awkward and foolish, and the next couple 
of minutes didn’t make me feel any better. I took dead 
aim at the target hanging some fifty feet away and 
missed it completely. I held the pistol with both hands 
and missed it again. I missed it right-handed and 
left-handed. I missed it with my right eye closed, I 
missed it with my left eye closed, I missed it with both 
eyes open. 

Well, if the only thing I had going for me was my 
instinct, I decided to give that instinct a chance. I threw 
myself on the floor, rolled over twice, and fired off a 
quick round — and shot out the overhead light. 

So much, I told myself, for instinct. Obviously the 
man I used to be was more at home ducking bullets than 
aiming them. 

I left the gallery, hunted up a couple of Erased 
Friends, and asked them if they’d ever experienced 
anything like my little flash of deja vu. One of them 
thought it was hilarious — they may have made him 
safe, but I have my doubts about whether they made him 
sane — and the other confessed to certain vague stirrings 
whenever she heard a John Philip Sousa march, which 
wasn’t exactly the answer I was looking for. 

I stopped off for lunch at a local soya joint, spent 
another fruitless fifteen minutes in the library with my 
friend the computer, and went back to my brownstone 
condo to think things out. The whole time I was riding 
the sidewalk home I kept shadow-boxing and dancing 
away from imaginary enemies and reaching for a 
nonexistent revolver under my left arm, but nothing felt 
natural or even comfortable. After I got off the slidewalk 
and walked the final half block to my front door, I 
decided to see if I could pick my lock, but I gave it up 
after about ten minutes, which was probably just as well 
since a passing cop was giving me the fish-eye. 

I poured myself a stiff drink — Erasures’ homes 
differ in locale and decor and many other respects, but 
you’ll find liquor in all of them, as well as cheap 
memory courses and the Collected Who’s Who in 
Organized Crime tapes — and tried, for the quadrillionth 
time, to dredge up some image from my past. The 
carnage of war, the screams and supplications of rape 
victims, the moans of old men and children lying sliced 
and bleeding in Central Park, all were grist for my 



ME AND MY SHADOW 



25 



mental mill — and all felt unfamiliar. 

So I couldn’t shoot and I couldn’t pick locks and I 
couldn’t remember. All that was on the one hand. 

On the other hand was just one single solitary fact: I 
had ducked. 

But somewhere deep down in my gut (certainly not 
in my brain) I knew, I knew, that the man I used to be 
had screamed wordlessly in my ear (or somewhere) to hit 
the deck before I got my/his/our damned fool heads 
blown off. 

This was contrary to everything they had told me at 
the Institute. I wasn’t supposed to be in communication 
with my former self. Even emergency conferences while 
bullets flew through the air were supposed to be 
impossible. 

The more I thought about it, the more I decided that 
this definitely qualified as a bonafide Institute-visiting 
emergency. So I put on my jacket and left the condo and 
started off for the Institute. I didn’t have any luck 
flagging down a cab — like frightened herbivores, New 
York cabbies hide at the first hint of nightfall — so I 
started walking over to the East River slidewalk. 

I had gone about two blocks when a grungy little 
man with water eyes, a pock-marked face, and a very 
crooked nose jumped out at me from between two 
buildings, a wicked-looking knife in his hand. 

Well, three years without being robbed in Manhattan 
is like flying 200 missions over Iraq or Paraguay or 
whoever we’re mad at this month. You figure your 
number is up and you stoically take what’s coming to 
you. 

So I handed him my wallet, but there was only a 
single small bill in it, plus a bunch of credit cards geared 
to my voiceprint, and he suddenly threw the wallet on 
the ground and went berserk, ranting and raving about 
how I had cheated him. 

I started backing away, which seemed to enrage him 
further, because he screamed something obscene and 
raced toward me with his knife raised above his head, 
obviously planning to plunge it into my neck or chest. 

I remember thinking that of all the places to die, 
Second Avenue between 35th and 36th Streets was 
perhaps the very last one I’d have chosen. I remember 
wanting to yell for help but being too scared to force a 
sound out. I remember seeing the knife plunge down at 
me as if in slow motion. 

And then, the next thing I knew, he was lying on his 
back, both his arms broken and his nose spouting blood 
like a fountain, and I was kneeling down next to him, 
just about to press the point of the knife into his throat. 

I froze, trying to figure out what had happened, 
while deep inside me a voice — not — angry, not 
bloodthirsty, but soft and seductive — crooned: Do it, do 
it. 

“Don’t kill me!” moaned the man, writhing beneath 
my hands. “Please don’t kill me!” 

You ’ll enjoy it, murmured the voice. You 'll see. 

I remained motionless for another moment, then 



dropped the knife and ran north, paying no attention to 
the traffic signals and not slowing down until I 
practically barreled into a bus that was blocking the 
intersection at 42nd Street. 

Fool! whispered the voice. Didn ’t I save your life? 
Trust me. 

Or maybe it wasn’t the voice at all. Maybe I was just 
imagining what it would say if it were there. 

At any rate, I decided not to go to the Institute after 
all. I had a feeling that if I walked in looking breathless 
and filthy and with the mugger’s blood all over me, 
they’d just Erase me again before I could tell them what 
had happened. 

So I went back home, took a quick Dryshower, 
hunted up Dr. Brozgold’s number in the book, and called 
him. 

“Yes?” he said after the phone had chimed twice. He 
looked just as I remembered him: tall and cadaverous, 
with a black mustache and bushy eyebrows, the kind of 
man who could put on a freshly-pressed suit and 
somehow manage to look rumpled. 

“I’m an Erasure,” I said, coming right to the point. 
“You worked on me.” 

“I’m afraid we have a faulty connection here,” he 
said, squinting at his monitor. “I’m not receiving a video 
transmission.” 

“That’s because I put a towel over my camera,” I 
told him. 

“I assume that this is an emergency?” he asked 
dryly, cocking one of those large, thick, dishevelled 
eyebrows. 

“It is,” I said. 

“Well, Mr. X — I hope you don’t mind if I call you 
that — what seems to be the problem?” 

“I almost killed a man tonight.” 

“Really?” he said. 

“Doesn’t that surprise you?” 

“Not yet,” he replied, placing his hands before him 
and juxtaposing his fingers. “I’ll need some details first. 
Were you driving a car or robbing a bank or what?” 

“I almost killed this man with my bare hands.” 

“Well, whoever you are, Mr. X, and whoever you 
were,” he said, stroking his ragged mustache 
thoughtfully, “I think I can assure you that almost killing 
people probably wasn’t your specialty.” 

“You don’t understand,” I said doggedly. “I used 
karate or kung fu or something like that, and 1 don’t 
know any karate or kung fu.” 

“Who is this?” he demanded suddenly. 

“Never mind,” I said. “What I want to know is: What 
the hell is happening to me?” 

“Look, I really can’t help you without knowing your 
case history,” he said, trying to keep the concern out of 
his voice and not quite succeeding. 

“I don’t have a history,” I said. “I’m a brand new 
man, remember?” 

“Then what have you got against telling me who you 
are?’ 



26 



GALAXY 



“I’m trying to find out who I am!” I said hotly. “A 
little voice has been telling me that killing people feels 
good.” 

“If you’ll present yourself at the Institute first thing 
in the morning. I’ll do what I can,” he said nervously. 

“I know what you can do,” I snapped. “You’ve 
already done it to me. I want to know if it’s being 
wndone.” 

“Absolutely not!” he said emphatically. “Whoever 
you are, your memory has been totally eradicated. No 
Erasure has ever developed even partial recall.” 

“Then how did I mangle a professional mugger who 
was attacking me with a knife?” 

“The human body is capable of many things when 
placed under extreme duress,” he replied in 
carefully-measured tones. 

“I’m not talking about jumping ten feet in the air or 
running fifty yards in three seconds when you’re being 
chased by a wild animal! I’m talking about crippling an 
armed opponent with three precision blows.” 

“I really can’t answer you on the spur of the 
moment,” he said. “If you’ll just come down to the 
Institute and ask for me, I’ll-—” 

“You’ll what?” I demanded. “Erase a little smudge 
that you overlooked the first time?” 

“If you won’t give me your name and you won’t 
come to the Institute,” he said, “just what is it you want 
from me?” 

“I want to know what’s happening.” 

“So you said,” he commented dryly. 

“And I want to know who I was.” 

“You know we can’t tell you that,” he said. Then he 
paused and smiled ingratiatingly into the camera. “Of 
course, we might make an exception in this case, given 
the nature of your problem. But we can’t do that unless 
we know who you are now.” 

“What assurances have I that you won’t Erase me 
again?” 

“You have my word,” he said with a fatherly smile. 
“You probably gave me your word the last time, 
too,” I said. 

“This conversation is becoming tedious, Mr. X. I 
can’t help you without knowing who you are. In all 
likelihood nothing at all out of the ordinary has happened 
or is happening to you. And if indeed you are developing 
a new criminal persona, I have no doubt that we’ll be 
meeting before too long anyway. So if you have nothing 
further to say, I really do have other things to do.” He 
paused, then looked sharply into the camera. “What’s 
really disturbing you? If you are actually experiencing 
some slight degree of recall, why should that distress 
you? Isn’t that what all you Erasures are always hoping 
for?” 

“The voice,” I said. 

“What about the voice?” he demanded. 

“I don’t know whether to believe it or not.” 

“The one that tells you to kill people?” 

“It sounds like it knows ,” I said softly. “It sounds 



convincing.” 

“Oh, Lord!” he whispered, and hung up the phone. 

“Are you still there?” I asked the voice. 

There was no answer, but I really didn’t expect any. 
There was no one around to kill. 

Suddenly I began to feel constricted, like the walls 
were closing in on me and the air was getting too thick to 
breathe, so I put my jacket back on and went out for a 
walk, keeping well clear of Second Avenue. 

I stayed away from the busier streets and stuck to the 
residential areas — as residential as you can get in 
Manhattan, anyway — and spent a couple of hours just 
wandering aimlessly while trying to analyze what was 
happening to me. 

Two trucks backfired, but I didn’t duck either time. 
A huge black man with a knife handle clearly visible 
above his belt walked by and gave me a long hard look, 
but I didn’t disarm him. A police car cruised by, but I 
felt no urge to run. 

In fact, I had just about convinced myself that Dr. 
Brozgold wasn’t humoring me after all but was 
absolutely right about my having an overactive 
imagination, when a cheaply-dressed blonde hooker 
stepped out of a doorway and gave me the eye. 

This one, whispered the voice. 

I stopped dead in my tracks, terribly confused. 

Trust me, it crooned. 

The hooker smiled at me and, as if in a trance, I 
returned the smile and let her lead me upstairs to her 
sparsely-furnished room. 

Patience, cautioned the voice. Not too fast. Enjoy. 

She locked the door behind us. 

What if she screams, I asked myself. We’re on the 
fourth floor. How will I get away? 

Relax, said the voice, all smooth and mellow. First 
things first. You ’ll get away, never fear. I 'll take care of 
you. 

The hooker was naked now. She smiled at me again, 
murmured something unintelligible, then came over and 
started unbuttoning my shirt. 

I smashed a thumb into her left eye, heard bones 
cracking as I drove a fist into her rib cage, listened to her 
scream as I brought the edge of my hand down on the 
back of her neck. 

Then there was silence. 

It was fabulous! moaned the voice. Just fabulous! 
Suddenly it became solicitous. Was it good for you, too? 

I waited a moment for my breathing to return to 
normal, for the flush of excitement to pass, or at least 
fade a little. 

“Yes,” I said aloud. “Yes. I enjoyed it.” 

I told you, said the voice. They may have changed 
your memories, but they can ’t change your soul. You and 
I have always enjoyed it. 

“Do we just kill women?” I asked, curious. 

I don ’t remember, admitted the voice. 

“Then how did you know we had to kill this one?” 

I know them when I see them, the voice assured me. 



ME AND MY SHADOW 



27 



I mulled that over while I went around tidying up the 
room, rubbing the doorknob with my handkerchief, 
trying to remember if I had touched anything else. 

They took away your fingerprints, said the voice. 
Why bother? 

“So they don’t know they’re looking for an Erasure,” 
I said, giving the room a final examination and then 
walking out the door. 

I went home, put the towel back over the vidiphone 
camera, and called Dr. Brozgold. 

“You again?” he said when he saw that he wasn’t 
receiving a picture. 

“Yes,” I said. “I’ve thought about what you said, and 
I’ll come in tomorrow morning.” 

“At the Institute?” he asked, looking tremendously 
relieved. 

“Right. Nine o’clock sharp,” I replied. “If you’re not 
there when I arrive, I’m leaving.” 

“I’ll be there,” he promised. 

I hung up the vidiphone, checked out his address in 
the directory, and walked out the door. 

Smart, said the voice admiringly as I walked the 22 
blocks to Brozgold’s apartment. I would never have 
thought of this. 

“That’s probably why they caught you,” I whispered 
into the cold night air. 

It took me just under an hour to reach Brozgold’s 
place. (They turn the slidewalks off at nine o’clock to 
save money.) Somehow I had known that he’d be in one 
of the century-old four-floor apartment buildings; any 
guy who dressed like he did and forgot to comb his hair 
wasn’t about to waste money on a high-rise to impress 
his friends. I found his apartment number, then walked 
around to the back, clambered up the rickety wooden 
stairs to the third floor, checked out a number of 
windows, and knew I had the right place when I came to 
a kitchen with about fifty books piled on the floor and 
four days’ worth of dishes in the sink. 1 couldn’t jimmy 
this lock any better than my own, but the door was one 
of the old wooden types and I finally threw a shoulder 
against it and broke it. 

“Who’s there?” demanded Brozgold, racing out of 
his bedroom in his pajamas and looking even more 
unkempt than usual. 

“Hi,” I said with a cheerful smile, shoving him back 
into the bedroom. “Remember me?” 

I closed the door behind us, just to be on the safe 
side. The room smelled of stale tobacco, or maybe it was 
just stale clothing in his closet. His furniture — a 
dresser, a writing desk, a double bed. a couple of 
nightstands, and a chair — had cost him a bundle, but 
they hadn’t seen a coat of polish, or even a dust rag, 
since the day they’d been delivered. 

He was staring at me, eyes wide, a dawning look of 
recognition on his face. “You’re. .. ah. ..Jurgins? Johnson? 
I can't remember the name on the spur of the moment. 
You're the one who's been calling me?” 

"I am," I said, pushing him onto the chair. "And it's 



William Jordan.” 

“Jordan. Right.” He looked flustered, like he wasn’t 
fully awake yet. “What are you doing here, Jordan? I 
thought we were meeting at the Institute tomorrow 
morning.” 

“I know you did,” I answered him. “I wanted to 
make sure that all your security was down there so we 
could have a private little chat right here and now.” 

He stood up. “Now you listen to me, Jordan — ” 

I pushed him back down, hard. 

“That’s what I came here for,” I said. “And the first 
thing I want to listen to is the reason I was Erased.” 

“You were a criminal,” he said coldly. “You know 
that.” 

“What crime did I commit?” 

“You know I can’t tell you that!” he yelled, trying to 
hide his mounting fear beneath a blustering exterior. 
“Now get the hell out of here and — ” 

“How many people did I kill with my bare hands?” I 
asked pleasantly. 

“What?” 

“I just killed a woman,” I said. “I enjoyed it. 1 mean, 
1 really enjoyed it. Right at this moment I’m trying to 
decide how much I’d like killing a doctor.” 

“You’re crazy!” he snapped. 

“As a matter of fact,” I replied. “I have a certificate 
stating that the State of New York considers me to be 
absolutely sane.” I grinned. “Guess who signed it?” 

“Go away!” he yelled. 

“As soon as you tell me what I want to know.” 

“I can’t!” 

“Are you still with me?” I whispered under my 
breath. 

Right here, said the voice. 

“Take over at the proper moment or I’m going to 
break my hand,” I told it. 

Ready when you are, it replied. 

“Perhaps you need a demonstration of my skill and 
my sincerity,” I said to Brozgold as I walked over to the 
dresser. 

I lifted my hand high above my head and started 
bringing it down toward the dull wooden surface. I 
winced just before impact, but it didn’t hurt a bit — and 
an instant later the top of the dresser and the first two 
drawers were split in half. 

“Thanks,” I whispered. 

Any time. 

“That could just as easily have been you,” I said, 
turning back to Brozgold. “In fact, if you don’t tell me 
what I need to know, it will be you.” 

“You’ll kill me anyway,” he said, shaking with fear 
but blindly determined to stick to his guns. 

“I’ll kill you if you don’t tell me,” I said. “If you do, 
1 promise I won’t harm you.” 

“What’s the promise of a killer worth?” he said 
bitterly. 

“You’re the one who gave me my sense of honor,” I 
pointed out. “Do you go around manufacturing liars?” 



28 



GALAXY 



“No. But I don’t go around manufacturing killers, 
either.” 

“I just want to know who I was and what I did,” I 
repeated patiently. “I don’t want to do it again. I just 
need some facts to fight off this damned voice.” 

Well, I like that, said the voice. 

“I can’t,” repeated Brozgold. 

“Sure you can,” I said, taking a couple of steps 
toward him. 

“It won’t do you any good,” he said, on the verge of 
tears now. “Everything about you, every last detail, has 
been classified. You won’t be able to follow up on 
anything I know.” 

“Maybe we won’t have to,” I said. “How many 
people did I kill?” 

“I can’t.” 

I reached over to the little writing desk and brought 
my hand down. It split in two. 

“How many?” I repeated, glaring at him. 
“Seventeen!” he screamed, tears running down his 
face. 

“Seventeen?” I repeated wonderingly. Even I was 
surprised that I had managed to amass so many. “Who 
were they? Men? Women?” He didn’t answer, so I took 
another step toward him and added menacingly, 
“Doctors?” 

“No!” he said quickly. “Not doctors. Never doctors!” 
“Then who?” 

“Whoever they paid you to kill!” he finally blurted 
out. 

“I was a hit man?” 

He nodded. 

“I must have been very good at it to kill seventeen 
people,” I said thoughtfully. “How did they finally catch 
me?” 

“Your girlfriend turned state’s evidence. She knew 
you had been hired to kill Carlo Castinerra — ” 

“The politician?” I interrupted. 

“Yes. So the police staked him out and nailed you. 
You blundered right into their trap.” 

I shook my head sadly. “That’s what I get for 
trusting people. And this, ” I added, bringing the edge of 
my hand down on his neck and producing a loud 
snapping noise, “is whatyow get.” 

That was unethical, said my little voice. You 
promised not to hurt him if he told you what you wanted 
to know. 

“We trusted someone once, and look where it got 
us,” I replied, going around wiping various surfaces. 
“What about that hooker? Had someone put out a 
contract on her?” 

I don ’t remember, said the voice. It just felt right. 
“And how did killing Dr. Brozgold feel?” I asked. 
Good, said the voice after some consideration. It felt 
good. I enjoyed it. 

“So did I,” I admitted. 

Then are we going back in business? 

“No,” I said. “If there’s one thing I’ve learned as an 



accountant, it’s that everything has a pattern to it. Fall 
into the same old pattern and we’ll wind up right back at 
the Institute.” 

Then what will we do? asked the voice. 

“Oh, we’ll go right on killing people,” 1 assured it. “I 
must confess that it’s addictive. But I make more than 
enough money to take care of my needs, and I don’t 
suppose you have any use for money.” 

None, said the voice. 

“So now we’ll just kill whoever we want in any way 
that pleases us,” I said. “They’ve made William Jordan a 
stickler for details, so I think we’ll be a lot harder to 
catch then we were when I was you.” I busied myself 
wiping the dresser as best I could. 

“Of course,” I added, crossing over to the desk and 
going to work on it, “I suppose we could start with Carlo 
Castinerra, just for old time’s sake.” 

I’d like that, said the voice, trying to control its 
excitement. 

“I thought you might,” I said dryly. “And it will tidy 
up the last loose end from our previous life. I hate loose 
ends; I suppose it’s my accountant’s mind.” 

So that’s where things stand now. 

I’ve spent the last two days at the office, catching up 
on my work. At nights I’ve cased Castinerra’s house. I 
know where all the doors and windows are, how to get to 
the slidewalk from the kitchen entrance, what time the 
servants leave, what time the lights go out. 

So this Friday, at 5:00 PM on the dot, I’m going to 
leave the office and go out to dinner at a posh French 
restaurant that guarantees there are no soya products 
anywhere on the premises. After that I’ll slide over to 
what’s left of the theater district and catch the old 
Sondheim classic they’ve unearthed after all these years. 
Then it’s off to an elegant nearby bar for a cocktail or 
two. 

And then, with a little help from my shadow. I’ll pay 
a long-overdue call on the estimable Mr. Castinerra. 

Only this time, I’ll do it right. 

Erasures are, by and large, pretty lonely people. I 
can’t tell you how nice it is to finally have a hobby that I 
can share with a friend. 

— MIKE RESNICK 




DOUGLASS-TRUTH INSTITUTE 

PO BOX 794 PENN VALLEY CA 95946 



SEND A DOLLAR FOR POSTCARDS AND CATALOG 



CRYSTAL 



29 




CRYSTAL 

By ALMA MARIA GARCIA 

Illustrated by Rivera 

ary Ann Baldwin stood on the veranda of the 
ramshackle Offworld Health building. She 
savagely gripped the unfinished wooden rail, 
welcoming the sharp pain of the splinters in her palms. 
First Ritchie, then Michael, and now Todd, she thought. 

“It’s only his fifth birthday, Richard,” she protested. 
“He can’t keep up with you all.” 

“It’ll do him good. You baby him too much.” 

“Don’t run too fast.” 

“I’m a doctor, for God’s sake, I know what my kids 
are capable of. I only want what’s best for Todd.” 

Sure, she thought, just like you only wanted what 
was best for Ritchie when you wouldn’t let him go to the 
zoo at the Santa Cruz colony. 

Melody looked at her mother’s set face. “Todd will 
be OK, Mom. I’ll go wash the crystal for you and pack it 
away.” She went inside. Mary Ann trailed after her, tears 
brimming. 

The crystal was a wedding present from Mary Ann’s 
grandmother. It had cost a small fortune to ship it to 
Boralia, a mining planet light years away from the 
regular space lanes. It was only brought out on special 
occasions. According to Dr. Baldwin, it represented 
gracious living, but from the beginning it had become a 



symbol of Mary Ann’s extravagance and selfishness. 

“When are you going to stop ordering those useless 
magazines and gadgets from Earth?” Dr. Baldwin had 
asked, glaring at her. 

“I thought we could afford them.” 

“You know damn well you used up all our spare 
credits importing the crystal.” 

“Richard!” 

The time he threw out a smoking oil lamp, he said, 
“If you hadn’t insisted on bringing the crystal, we could 
have had a generator.” 

“Richard, I—” 

“If it weren’t for the crystal, we might have afforded 
a newer house.” 

“It was your idea to bring the crystal, even though 
Offworld wouldn’t pay for it. You said it would remind 
us of Earth — of our heritage.” 

“Oh, sure. Blame it all on me.” 

“Don’t you remember, Richard, I said it wouldn’t be 
appropriate in a place where there was no social life and 
nobody gave dinner parties?” 

“We use it, don’t we? You’re always complaining 
and depressed because Boralia isn’t what you expected.” 
Boralia is everything I expected. You are not. 

After their fourth child, Todd, was born, it suddenly 
hadn’t mattered what Dr. Baldwin said. 

“Leave me alone, Richard. I need rest.” 

“Fine.” He turned away. 

“I want my own room.” 

He left the bedroom, slamming the door. He slept on 






30 



GALAXY 



the couch that night. After that, he fixed up a cot in the 
dispensary. 

Five years later, he was still sleeping there, his only 
companion a foul temper. 

Mary Ann cried herself to sleep just about every 
night. In the mornings, her face was puffy and 
unattractive, which depressed her even more. 

When the wife of the sole alien in their vicinity 
slithered in to request help for her husband’s molt, only 
Mary Ann’s sense of hospitality roused her from her 
despondency. 

“Come in Scalnia.” She offered the scaly apod a 
chair. “The Doctor has already left for the mining camp. 
I’ll come instead and do my best, but I’m inexperienced 
and have no equipment. Can I get you some breakfast?” 
“No, Mrs. Doctor, we cannot eat during the molting 
period; the food turns to poison in our bodies.” 

Mary Ann nodded. “It’s an allergic reaction. I’ve 
heard the Doctor mention it. I didn’t know it was your 
molting period, too.” 

“It should not be. I am not so far along as Borgli, but 
only one mate should be going through the molt, the 
other should already have gone through it.” 

“What happened? Did you miscalculate?” 

The alien’s head swung back and forth and she made 
a little wailing noise. “Not exactly, Mawan.” 

Scalnia had not mastered the pronunciation of Mary 
Ann’s name, but Mary Ann rather liked the contraction 
and did not correct her. 

The serpentine creature went on, “We knew this 
might happen, but we were very much drawn, attracted 
— in love? — and did not listen when our elders said we 
should wait with our families until at least one of us had 
gone through our final molt.” 

“How long will it last?” 

“Ten darks and lights.” 

“And then — ” 

“And then we will be beautiful.” 

“You are beautiful now,” said Mary Ann, stroking 
the shimmering blue and gold scales of the alien and 
looking into the slanted black eyes with their glowing 
ruby pupils. She could feel the powerful muscles rippling 
under the skin of the sinuous body. It made her shiver 
with delight. 

Scalnia gave the alien equivalent of a laugh, which 
sounded like the rustling of the papery leaves on the 
waving stems of the alien bamboo. 

“After our final molt, we will emerge with limbs, 
and I will bring gifts to repay you for your kindness, 
Mrs. Doctor. What would you like?” 

Mary Ann gave a sardonic laugh. “What I want, no 
one can give me.” 

The alien wriggled, conveying concern. “I think I 
will be able to give you anything at all, Mrs. Doctor. Tell 
me what you want.” 

With a sigh, Mary Ann said, “I want freedom for my 
children.” 

Scalnia’s serpent body heaved and reared. She 



balanced on the tip of her tail, towering a full two feet 
over Mary Ann’s head. “Your children are born with 
limbs. They are free already.” 

“They are not free in the way I mean.” 

The alien cocked her head on one side in an oddly 
human gesture, indicating she awaited further 
clarification. 

Mary Ann explained. “I want them to be free to grow 
up as whole human beings, to realize they have seeds of 
great individuality within them, and they need not be 
doomed to follow in their parents’ footsteps.” 

“I do not understand the concepts, but it is enough 
for me that you wish this thing. How can it be carried 
out?” 

“It can’t. The Doctor only recently let them attend 
the Earth School at Santa Cruz. He’d never let them go 
to Earth.” 

“You wish to send them away?” 

Mary Ann nodded. “Yes, I don’t want them to stay 
on Boralia because there’s no work for them here, but 
our Offworld contract has no provision for sending 
anyone back to Earth, and the Doctor says we can’t 
afford it.” 

Scalnia glided down to the floor and coiled around 
the chair, resting her head on the seat. “They could teach 
our young the Earth language, as you have taught me.” 
Mary Ann raised her hands and then let them fall 
again in futility. “It’s not just that, Scally. They’ll need 
mates and children of their own. There are few to choose 
from in Santa Cruz. It’s possible they would return after 
they were married.” 

“And you, Mawan, and Mr. Doctor?” 

“It’s too late for me, and the Doctor sees no need for 
change.” 

Scalnia’s graceful head circled and swooped. “I did 
not know Mr. Doctor was so — so difficult. I’ll think 
about what you have told me, Mawan, but now can you 
come to help my Borgli?” 

“Of course. I’ll just leave a note for the children in 
case I’m not back when they come home from school.” 
Recent rain had brought down a quantity of sand and 
silt from the hills, which the seasonal dry wind blew in 
their faces, forcing them to cover their heads, slowing 
their progress. It took longer than either of them had 
expected to traverse the two or three kilometers to 
Scalnia and Borgli’s cavelike home. 

When they arrived, Borgli was struggling to split his 
lovely skin down the length of his writhing body. 

Scalnia glided over to him and pulled with her tiny 
teeth on his thick, tight, scales. She turned to Mary Ann, 
who ran over and tugged at a portion of the skin around 
his neck. It wouldn’t budge and was constricting his 
breathing. 

Mary Ann tried to stay calm. What did Richard do 
when an alien was separated from its family during the 
final molt? Oh, God, she was sure Richard performed 
surgery on the gorgeous, tough hide. 

“Scally, I need some kind of a cutting tool. Do you 



CRYSTAL 



31 



have anything sharp?” 

Scalnia rushed around, panic-stricken. They had no 
tools; without anything to grasp them with yet, she and 
Borgli couldn’t use them. 

The creature’s delicate mouth worked pitifully. “No, 
Mawan, we have nothing.” 

“How does the family usually assist?” 

“They cut a long slit down the belly before the hide 
gets too hard and pull on either side until it separates.” 

Since it wouldn’t help matters, Mary Ann forbore to 
ask why they had moved away from the rest of the 
family when they knew this might happen. 

What diseases did they suffer from? Would Borgli 
get an infection if she accidentally cut his new skin while 
helping him? She wished she’d asked Richard more 
questions. She’d just have to assume that certain 
principles of medicine were valid throughout the galaxy. 

“I can do nothing for him unless we bring him back 
to the Doctor’s house. We must hurry,” she added, as his 
breathing became more and more distressed. 

With the wind in their favor, Mary Ann dragged and 
Scalnia pushed the now unconscious Borgli down the 
dusty trail to the Baldwin compound. 

Mary Ann began boiling kettles of water on the 
Earth-type, wood-burning stove the grateful miners had 
bought them soon after they’d arrived. 

She looked in desperation at her kitchen knives. 
None were sharp enough. All the surgical equipment was 
kept in the land vehicle Richard used; he never left any 
of it lying around. What could she do? 

Borgli’s breaths rattled and wheezed in his throat. 
Mary Ann hunted around the small kitchen. The box 
containing the crystal caught her eye. She hauled it down 
from the shelf, opened it, grabbed a large jug by the 
handle, and smashed it against the stone sink. It shattered 
nicely with a sharp cutting edge attached to one side of 
the handle. She sterilized it in the boiling water. 

She scrubbed the kitchen table. 

“Help me get him up here,” she said to Scalnia, who 
was swaying and mewing feebly, watching Mary Ann’s 
preparations. Scalnia pushed underneath Borgli and 
raised him. Mary Ann maneuvered him into position. 
She washed the dust off his gleaming scales and poured 
an acrid, all-purpose microbicide over them. It made 
Mary Ann’s eyes smart and her nose run, but it cleared 
her head. 

With swift, sure strokes, Mary Ann applied the 
broken crystal to Borgli’s hide. The tough scales gave 
way reluctantly along the scored line as she deepened it. 

“Where are your families now?” Mary Ann asked, 
hoping to distract the agitated Scalnia, who was now 
gliding in and out of the furniture and coiling around the 
table legs. 

“It was as though they left us in body and spirit when 
we did not listen to their advice. Oh, Mawan, we were so 
wanting to be together. .” 

A faint echo sounded in Mary Ann’s head, the voice 
of her father: “If you persist in going with Richard to 



that lonely practice on Batvia — ” 

“Boralia.” 

“Whatever. You will be without your family, utterly 
at the mercy of the stars, not to mention Richard.” 

“Father, love is stronger than the stars. Richard 
needs me by his side.” 

“And what of your needs, Mary Ann?” 

“I need to be with Richard.” 

The memory now seemed remote, as though it 
belonged to a previous life. It dissipated. 

She concentrated on the deep groove in Borgli’s 
hide. “I understand, Scally. I just hope you’ll always 
want to be together.” 

The idea of not wanting made the alien gaze with her 
glowing red pupils at Mary Ann in silence. 

At last, Borgli’s neck was freed and his breathing 
eased. Mary Ann sighed with relief. 

As the lower scaly section of his skin began to fall 
away, Borgli recovered consciousness and wriggled out, 
his new arms and legs pale and soft, but sturdy enough. 
He was not human; his head remained serpentine, but he 
definitely was masculine. 

He knew no Earth words. As a way of thanking 
Mary Ann, he walked over and embraced her. For the 
first time in years, she felt an urge to respond sexually, 
just managing to curb the impulse at the last moment. 
This is crazy, she thought. His wife is right there. 

Scalnia coiled around them both. “Thank you, 
Mawan. I will be forever grateful. Somehow I will repay 
you.” 

Sweating and embarrassed, Mary Ann freed herself. 
“I’m just happy I was able to help. Don’t even think 
about repaying me.” 

“My molt will begin tomorrow or the next day. I will 
have my Borgli to help me. You have saved both our 
lives. You shall have both our skins. They are worth 
many credits on Boralia. Enough for trips to your Earth.” 

Mary Ann gasped, unable to comprehend what this 
might mean to her. 

“H-how c-can I ever thank you?” she stammered. 

The alien gently nudged Mary Ann with her serpent 
head. “I should be asking that question, Mawan.” 

Mary Ann shooed them out the door. “Go celebrate, 
or something,” she told them. 

Once alone, a new and strange resolve began 
building inside her. She removed the rest of the crystal 
from the box, set it out on the table, and sat down to wait 
for Richard’s return. I might just have enough time to do 
it before the children get back, she thought. 

When Dr. Baldwin came home, a crystal cup flew 
through the air by his head and smashed on the door 
post, falling with a tinkling crash to the floor. 

He stood, stock-still, staring at the shattered crystal 
on the ground beside him. Before he could say anything, 
a plate and a serving dish followed. CRASH! SMASH! 

Methodically, Mary Ann picked up piece after piece 
and aimed at the door. She had never used profanity in 
her life, but now she came close. “You stupid — mmm 



32 



GALAXY 



— ooh! I never wanted it in the first place — it was 
YOUR dumb idea!” 

When the last piece of crystal lay in ruins in the 
doorway, Mary Ann smiled, picked up Borgli’s hide and 
stroked it. 

Richard crunched through the glass towards her and 
touched her arm. “I — I had no idea you disliked the 
crystal, Mary Ann. I thought you wanted it. That’s why I 
had it shipped out with us.” 

She didn’t even care he acknowledged it was his 
idea. Nor did she bother explaining there was nothing 
really wrong with the crystal; just with his complaints 
about it. 

“I hated it.” 

“Why didn’t you say so?” 

“Would you have sent it back?” She laughed at the 
idea. 

“Dearest, we must talk. Things haven’t been right 
between us for way too long. It’s been my fault as well 
as yours. Can we put it all behind us and start afresh?” 

Her eyes widened. Were a few broken glass dishes 
all it took to bring him to his senses? All these years of 
kowtowing to this man for fear of his violence, and here 
he was, behaving like a lamb. 

“Mary Ann, I miss you terribly and I want to move 
back in the bedroom.” 

It was too much of an about-face for her to take him 
seriously. He was probably in shock, she thought, and 
didn’t know what he was saying. 

“I don’t know, Richard, I’ll have to think it over. 
Let’s wait a while and see how it goes.” 

“I’ll help you clean up the mess,” he said. 

In a daze, Mary Ann scooped up dustpan after 
dustpan of broken glass and tried to come to terms with 
what Richard was saying. 

“I love you, Mary Ann. You’ve given me wonderful 
children and you’re a very good mother. Let’s stop 
acting like two idiots and live normally.” 

Almost against her will, Mary Ann was softening. 
Deep down, hadn’t she known she was partially to blame 
for Richard’s moods? And the memory of Borgli’s 
embrace still burned. 

“We-ell — ” 

Before she could finish, Dr. Baldwin took her in his 
arms, kissed her long and hard and guided her into the 
bedroom. 

“The children — ” she began, but a quick glance at 
the Earth-clock, revealed the Santa Cruz school land 
vehicle would not arrive for another twenty-five minutes. 

Their lovemaking was hungry, yet tender. 
Afterwards, Mary Ann sat on the bed and caressed 
Borgli’s hide. 

Dr. Baldwin had an early morning appointment with 
the medical director of the hospital in Santa Cruz. He 
whistled as he shaved with the old-style razor; somehow 
he’d never gotten used to the hair-growth inhibitors. 

Mary Ann watched him lazily from the bed. She had 



almost forgotten how sensual he was. Standing there in 
his bikini shorts, muscles rippling as he guided the razor 
over the stubble on his chin, he reminded her of Borgli. 

She wanted to tell him to wait, to be late, to send an 
excuse to the medical director, but five years of 
depression, sleeping alone, and feeling powerless had 
choked her spontaneity. 

She watched through the bedroom window as 
Richard strode towards the path where their LV was 
parked. He was about to climb in, when a glittering gold 
and blue figure appeared from behind it. 

Mary Ann’s first thought was that Scalnia was again 
seeking assistance. She screamed as she realized her 
mistake. The alien had swiftly coiled around the doctor 
and snapped his head back. 

Scalnia gently laid Dr. Baldwin’s body on the 
scrubby grass of the compound, and slithered towards 
the door. “I have repaid the debt, Mawan,” she called out 
in her sing-song voice. “Now your children are free.” 

—ALMA MARIA GARCIA 



THE 

ANCIENT ® 
GODDESS 

Ceramic replicas of 
ancient goddess figurines 
from many cultures, 
individually mounted on a 
wooden Lase. 

Tkese powerful figurines transport 
Lack in time and emanate tke mystery 
of ancient idols created in tke earliest 
if kuman civilization wken 
deities were wo rs kipped. 



Tke Goddess mak ing a tome-hack? 
Perhaps Ske never left. 



Call or write for more information. Dealer inquiries welcome. 

TH E MUSEUM GIFT SH OP 

Museum of Ancient and Modern Art 
1 1392 Pleasant Valley Road 
Penn Valley CA 95946 
(916) 432 - 3080 



periods c 
female 




Ancient Syrian Female Idol 
Circa 2000 D.C. 6” high. 




ZEN BASICS 

ATTENTION TRAINING THAT STARTS WHERE YOU ARE. 
AT LAST! A home Zen course! The Zen Basics Kit comes in a 
serigraphed gift box that includes a lesson cassette with the back- 
ground sounds of Tibetan singing bowls, a set of Zen rocks, a practice 
pad, instruction manual and accessories-all ready to use within 
minutes! CALL NOW: 1-800-869-0658 



KNOCKOUT 



33 




KNOCKOUT 

By ROBERT E. ROGOFF 

Illustrated by Heywood 

he last man on Earth sat alone in a room. There 
was a knock at the door . 

The man instantly went cold as a moon of 
Neptune. Someone else had survived. His first impulse 
was to grab one of the shotguns he had collected in the 
early days, back when he feared roving bands of 
pillaging survivalists might suddenly break down his 
door to wrest his provisions away. But the knock had 
been tentative, almost timid. He muted the videotape of 
On the Beach into silence and put the TV remote control 
down beside him on the end table. 

No dangerous marauder would claim authorship of 
such a delicate knock. It was as if a child were knocking. 
The seated man sprang from his lounge chair with 
growing joy — if a child had survived, perhaps the 
human race was not extinct after all. 

He bounded to the door, delirious with the giddy 
nervous excitement of a teenager on a first date, or an 
australopithecine discovering fire, or Albert Einstein 
scrawling “E=mc 2 ” for the first time. His hand slipped 



with cold perspiration as he unbolted the deadlock and 
turned the door handle. 

His heart pounded, forge-like, as he realized that 
before him stood another human being. And she was a 
young, beautiful woman. “You don’t know how glad I 
am to see you!” the man cried. 

“Actually, like, I do,” said the woman, tightening her 
leather jacket around her as the wind played long tresses 
of beautiful hair around her face. Her features were sharp 
and provocative, yielding the suggestion of a fox. She 
gazed down, knowingly, and the man realized he was 
naked. 

In his growing modesty, the man pulled a robe 
around himself, knowing she had seen his manhood start 
to rise like a serpent at the very sight of her. He reached 
out and touched her hand, urging her into his home. 
Feeling another human’s flesh again made him dizzy. 
“I’m sorry. I must sit down. Would you care for some 
canned tuna? A frozen dinner? Beer?” 

“No thank you,” said the feminine figure, stepping in 
and perching on the armrest of the man’s chair. “This is 
a whole new world,” she said. 

“But it’s ours!” he said. He reached up to caress her 
forearm and found it surprisingly hard and sinewy. He 
thought to himself, how fortunate to stumble upon a 




34 



KNOCKOUT 



woman who was in such good condition. She would 
probably be extremely fertile, not to mention good in the 
feathers. “It’s up to us to be fruitful and multiply, if you 
get my drift.” 

“I get your drift all right, but I don’t think that’s 
going to happen.” 

“Is something wrong — are you . barren?” 

She got up and turned away, pulling an apple out of 
her jacket pocket. She took a few steps toward the 
flickering images on the TV, then spun around brightly, 
with the coordination and purpose of a dancer. She took 
a chomp out of the apple. 

Hearing the crisp wetness of her teeth biting into the 
ripe fruit, the man felt his mouth watering and he could 
barely contain himself. But he suddenly realized, she had 
probably been lost and wandering a long time. He could 
not just suddenly take her. At the very least, 
introductions were in order. He stood formally. “My 
name is Adam,” he said. 

“What a coincidence,” said the other in the room. 



who then reached up. Hands grabbed the long tresses of 
beautiful hair and yanked, pulling off a wig exposing a 
masculine receding hairline beneath. “My name is 
Adam, too.” 

—ROBERT E. ROGOFF 



MENLO'S MIDWAY TAPE 
COMMENTARIES 

"In the currency of the camy world, worth at least twelve 
wooden nickels. Step right up to this tape." 

-Bill 

"An intoxicating ramble through more wacko spaces than a 
near-sighted spider's got spectacles... I like this tape." 
-Douglass-T ruth 

$15.00 

Call 1-800-869-0658 

Or you can mail or fax the convenient order form on page 90. 





The Truffle Shop 

Brought Right to Your Home 
featuring the finest 
Chocolate Truffles 
by Chef Willem DeGroot 

The Truffle Team invites you to share 
the excitement of tasting the world's 
best chocolate truffles. Made with 
delicious Belgian chocolate, rlghthere 
In our custom kitchens by ChefWillem 
DeGroot, they are shipped to yon 
fresh every day. Send a gift assortment 
to your family and friends today — 
and don't forget to send a box to 
yourself! Call today for free brochure. 
1-800-366-3538 

DEGROOT' S PERSONAL 
GIFT SELECTIONS 



#500 - Round Mini Truffle Gift Box (8) $25.00 

#550 - Mini Truffle Gift Collection (16) $39.50 

#575 - Deluxe mini Truffle Collection (18) $42.50 

#901 - Nine Truffle Gift Box $37.50 

#601 - Six Truffle Gift Box $27.50 

#401 - Four Truffle Gift Box $20.50 

#701 - 3 Layer T ruffle T orte $31 .00 

#710 - Chocolate Oblivion Torte $26.00 



Prices include shipping charges 



( FLAVOR LIST ) 



WHITE CHOCOLATE 


SEMISWEET 


Hazelnut 


151 Rum 


Key Largo 


Amaretto 


Orange Napoleon 


Gold Rush 


Treasure Island 


Grand Marnier 


♦ While Almond 


Highlander 


♦ Lemon 


Matterhorn 




Mint 


MILK CHOCOLATE 


Zinnabar 



Caf§ Mocha 
Raspberry 

♦ Espresso 

♦ Peanut Butter 

♦ Raspberry Cream 

♦ Truffles without alcohol 



Black Forest 
Dutch Treat 



BITTERSWEET 

BlackTulip 
Cafe Diablo 
♦ Double Dutch 



MAIL ORDER 

CALL TO ORDER YOUR 
TRUFFLES & TORTES TODAY 

1 - 800 - 366-3538 

or (916) 265-3539 
408 Broad SL • Nevada City, CA 95959 




DESSERT 



35 




DESSERT 



By ROBERT E. ROGOFF 

Illustrated by L. Larsen 

^7^ he waitress hovered around their table like a 
II moth near a light. Finally, the hideously obese 
man waved her away. 

“We’re not ready to order yet,” he said. “Come back 
in a few minutes.” 

After the waitress departed, the weasel-like man with 
the scar across his face addressed his dining companion 
seated across the table from him. “I can assure you as we 
sit here tonight that Miller is quite dead or will be within 
minutes.” 

The obese man chortled. “That is good news.” He 
turned his massive body and snapped his fingers. The 
chair groaned in protest. 

The waitress sluggishly made her way to the table. 
“What’ll it be, honey?” 

“I’m celebrating tonight,” said the obese man. “Let 
me have a super duper hot fudge sundae with the works.” 
He almost drooled as he said this. 

“And you, dearie?” the waitress asked scarface. 

“Just coffee for me, dearie.” He grinned, showing a 
crooked row of teeth. 

The fat man looked as serious as his Buddha-like 
visage allowed. “You’ll receive the other ten thousand as 
per our agreement.” 

Scarface grinned again and rubbed his hands 
together. “Mr. Wilson,” he said, “In my line of business 
it pays to know what makes people tick. If you don’t 
think it too presumptuous of me, I’d like to inquire — ” 
He stopped abruptly as the waitress approached to fill his 
coffee cup. After she slowly melted away to the recesses 
of the dingy restaurant, he continued. “I was wondering . 
. just exactly why did you have me make this hit?” 

Wilson picked up his fork and rubbed a finger across 



its tines. “I suppose I can tell you. I don’t care whether 
you believe me or not.” 

“Why wouldn’t I believe you?” 

“Mr. Sloane, the sundae I ordered was the first food 
in years not on my very strenuous 400-calorie-a-day 
diet.” 

Sloane suppressed a smile. Tell me another story, he 
thought. 

Wilson continued. “Despite eating almost nothing 
since 1985, my weight has ballooned to over four 
hundred pounds. Last month I determined — never mind 
how — that Miller was eating for me. He ate the food 
and I gained the weight.” 

Sloane laughed but covered it by faking a coughing 
fit. This blimp was loon city. But a job was a job. He 
would take anyone’s money, even a loony tune-blimpo 
like Wilson’s. 

The waitress appeared and placed the sundae before 
Wilson. Wilson grabbed his spoon and eagerly attacked 
the monstrous ice cream creation. He lifted the first 
spoonful. “Here’s to the demise of Miller,” he said, 
slurping the ice cream down. 

Suddenly he dropped the spoon. It clattered to the 
formica table top. A clump of fudge-covered ice cream 
splattered nearby. 

“Are you okay?” asked Sloane. 

“I don’t feel too well,” moaned Wilson. A glazed 
look came into his eyes. “Oh, no. Don’t tell me...” 

“What?” 

“How did you do it?” he demanded. He was 
beginning to feel dizzy. And afraid. 

“Do it?” asked Sloane, fingering his scar. 

“How did you kill Miller?” 

Sloane smiled crookedly. “Nothin’ to it, Mr. Wilson. 
I poisoned his dinner.” 

—ROBERT E. ROGOFF 




36 



GALAXY 




f 

remind 



I’M DYING OUT 
HERE 

By ROBERT E. ROGOFF 

Illustrated by Tom X 

lop sweat was coming off him like William S. 
Burroughs coming off junk in a fictitious 
autobiography. Why did the microphone have to 
rerffind him of a penis now? — just as he was coming to 
the part in the bit about the gay bar? Shit, he thought. I’m 
dying out here. The material didn’t matter any more. 
What mattered? Life, the Universe, and Everything? Get 
a grip, he thought (not necessarily on the microphone). 
“Speaking of AIDS,” he continued by rote as his inner 
mind anchored him in reality. My name is Bart Berger, 
I’m doing stand-up at a comedy club — where, 
Albuquerque? No big deal, he couldn’t geographically 
place himself — since he had started being well-known 
enough to do the circuit he often didn’t know what city 
he was in. Today’s date — what was today’s date? As he 
spewed his “comedy routine” in a manner not 
inconsistent with executing a will, Berger realized he 
was not really seriously out of touch with reality after 
all. “I know an intravenous drug user who is so self 
destructive, when he shoots up, he uses a real gun.” 
Howls of demented New Mexico laughter peeled the air 
raw like a bad case of sunburn on a cowboy’s neck. 



A partially full can of Coors’ sailed by Berger’s right 
ear, spewing liquid behind it as if rocket-propelled. He 
instinctively flinched like a dog avoiding a nose swat 
with a rolled-up newspaper. “Sonofabitch New York 
Jew,” came a voice smeared like poorly-applied 
sunscreen, from the same vicinity as had come the beer 
can. 

They always thought he was a Jew in these hick 
towns. They didn’t realize he was a strayed Catholic, 
primarily of German ancestry. But his grandparents had 
hidden a family of Jews in their Berlin basement. Save a 
Jew for Christ. There was a joke in there somewhere, it 
just had to be teased out properly. He was losing it 
tonight. He thought about what his psychiatrist Dr. Sam 
had told him about the studies linking manic-depressive 
mental illness with a gift for creative thought. But was 
ripping off material like a sweathouse sewing-machine 
operator the same thing as creativity? 

Maybe he was not “oriented times three” — the 
medical jargon for the first criteria of not being 
psychotic — maybe he didn’t even exist. College was a 
long time ago, why was he asking “What is reality?” to 
himself as he uttered the punchline to a joke only 
Russian Jews usually got: “So the rabbi says, do you 
know how to daven yet? Yes or no?” Why had he done 
that joke? An intellectual defense mechanism — or just a 
death wish? For all he knew the whole audience was 
conspiring to take him on a train ride to a shower stall 
where poison gas came out of the shower head. 

A single laugh slashed the brutal silence. Berger 
thought it came from a comer of the room — but being in 



M DYING OUT HERE 



37 



the spotlight he couldn’t see a thing beyond the stage. He 
momentarily lost his timing, then on a tangent started 
involuntarily thinking about his college days. On 
automatic pilot jokes came spilling from his mouth he 
had never written, stolen, or even thought about before. 

“My junior year I went out with this girl a couple of 
times but I stopped seeing her because she was an 
alcoholic. I just found out she’s married and pregnant. 
She went to her doctor and said: ‘I’m all distraught and 
frightened. I’ve been drinking all this time carrying this 
unborn fetus. I’m afraid it will be bom with fetal alcohol 
syndrome.’” SHIT! he thought, this punchline is roaring 
at me like the locomotive in that Buster Keaton movie, 
AND IT’S NOT FUNNY! “The doctor told her: ‘It’s 
nothing. Go home, relax, and have a drink.’” 

The crowd roared with laughter.Assholes,he thought, 
his younger sister had been bom with Down Syndrome 
and died at the age of twenty. BIRTH DEFECTS 
AREN’T FUNNY! The crowd laughed again. I didn’t 
say anything else, he thought. More laughter. 

“My senior year I dated this really gorgeous girl — ” 
the laughter drowned him out, so he yelled: “but I 
stopped going out with her because she wasn 't an 
alcoholic!” 

Silence. They were laughing in the wrong places. 
But where were these jokes coming from? 

Laughter again. 

A heckler shouted: “I don’t know where you’re 
coming from!” 

Images of Nazis parading in front of Hitler 
stormtrooped through Berger’s semi-conscious mind. 
The bully who took his lunch money in third grade. The 
time he ran out of gas in the desert. The dream date with 
the woman, a hot looking fast-rising comic, who told 
him she’d never seen a smaller penis on a full-grown 
man, then laughed as if she was having a comedy 
orgasm. His grandfather having a fatal stroke as Berger 
read the newspaper article about the resurgence of 
neo-Nazism in America to the man. Breaking his tooth 
on a stone in his burrito. 

Earth to Berger! Earth to Berger! I have the ability to 
think clearly under extreme stress, he told himself. 

“Well, then, you must not be under extreme stress 
now!” chorused the audience in unison. 

He sat down on the stage, feeling the hardness of its 
nicked wooden floorboards through his dress pants, and, 
out of the spotlight, surveyed the audience. The audience 
stopped congealing into a faceless mass and began 
individuating, like cells of a blastocyst turning into an 
embryo. In the front row sat a girl with the characteristic 
features of Down Syndrome. God, it was creepy how all 
those kids looked alike. This girl could be his sister 
Jeanne. 

“I am,” said Jeanne from the first row. 

“You hear that, Billy?” asked the gray-haired man 
next to Jeanne — Berger’s dead grandfather. “I told you 
she was talkative.” 

This can’t be happening, thought Berger. 



“Maybe it isn’t,” chorused six million Jews in 
unison. 

“I knew this was coming the day they started you on 
Lithium,” said William S. Burroughs. 

Berger said, “Let me guess — you’re ALL DEAD?” 
“Yes,” said Jack Benny from a seat off to Berger’s 
right. “You’re familiar with the term ‘you killed them’?” 
Benny asked pausing exactly long enough and then 
saying, “Well, you killed them.’’'’ 

The audience howled with ecstasy. 

He recognized John Lennon. He recognized Nikolai 
Lenin. He recognized Richard M. Nixon. 

“Do me,” said Nixon. “Come on, Bart, you 
remember — it was right after Watergate.” 

Berger remembered. The flop sweat was forgotten. 
He didn’t feel anything at all anymore. His voice faltered 
but he choked out: “Nixon before Watergate:” He held 
his Nixonian gesture that, under other circumstances, 
was also the symbol for peace, or a communication used 
by a commodities arbitrageur. ‘“I am the President.’” He 
dropped his arms with his hands in the V-for victory 
configuration, or thought he did — - he couldn’t tell if 
they were even attached to his shoulders anymore. 
“Nixon after Watergate: ‘I’m not the President.’” 

JFK stood. “Do me.” 

“I never did you, I was too young.” 

“You’ll do me now.” 

Berger assumed a Massachusetts accent and said: 
“Ask not what your country can do for you; ask who the 
phenord shot me?” 

“Am I dead, too?” Berger asked. 

Silence. 

“I DON’T THINK YOU HEARD ME — ” 

“What, do you have a goyishe kup?” demanded 
Lenny Bruce as he was hauled out of the audience by 
three vice cops dressed circa the 1950s. 

Wait a minute, thought Berger. If this is a 
hallucination, maybe it’s not consistent, or can be 
manipulated be sheer thought alone. 

A frightened gasp issued from the audience. 

If I can kill them, I can have them — 

They were rolling in the aisles. 

I can have them — 

They were puking up on themselves. 

Jesus Christ! thought Berger, slightly feeling the 
eyes of a man who was maybe more than just a man 
gently wander over him. What if I want them to turn to 
the left, turn to the right, stand up, sit down — 

“Fight! Fight! Fight!” the crowd cheered. 

He had all the women strip. 

He had all the women masturbate. 

He had all the women come. 

When he was done messing with all of the 
audience’s bodies, he began on their minds. “In the 
Wizard of Oz, the horse of another color was colored 
with jello because certain types of coloring would have 
killed it. The model who was spray-painted gold in 
Goldfinger actually did pass away, poisoned from the 



38 



GALAXY 



pigment. The Caucasian man who took melanin pills in 
Black Like Me also kicked the bucket. They all dyed. 

“This is an interactive joke: My two favorite TV 
shows are L.A. Law and Star Trek: The Next Generation 
because. 

“Ending one: they are both set in California. 

“Ending two: they are both set in outer space.” 

He thought love at them. He thought hate at them. 
He thought a pile of shit the size of the Rocky Mountains 
at them. 

If life is a joke, and death is the punchline, who is the 
audience? 

We are, they thought back. But look again. 

He didn’t so much look as reach out somehow. 

In return, he was touched by every thought ever 
thought since thoughts had been thought. Every emotion 
ever felt out since emotions had been felt. Every 
experience ever had by any human being past, present, 
and future. Every life form on Earth. Every life form in 
the Universe. Every object in the Universe, every last 
subatomic particle. 

There is no conservation of matter, he quipped 
somehow in the hyperaware connectedness he was a part 
of now, only conversation of matters. 

A warm nourishment, not unlike laughter distilled to 
its epitome, washed through the Unity he was now part 
of. 

The Unity accepted Berger. 

Berger accepted the Unity. 

Berger ceased to end where Unity began. 

The Hispanic maid chewing nicotine gum unlocked 
and entered the door of the motel room in Flagstaff, 



Arizona. The TV was tuned to The Nashville Network, 
but the sound was off. Slumped on the bed was Billy 
Berger’s body, his chin stubbled with beard, his clothes 
wrinkled with decadence. On the night stand was his 
empty medication bottle. The maid had seen this before. 
She lifted the telephone receiver. 

The Unity dissolved like the suds of a bubblebath 
that had lasted too long, like a bachelor party gone 
wicked. 

Berger saw the vital signs monitor twice and heard it 
a million times as it beeped. 

“I think he’s coming out of it,” said an impression of 
a petite woman with a gold tooth and hair the color of 
burnt pudding. 

A man with a wild shock of salt-and-pepper hair 
wearing a white jacket was bent over Berger, holding a 
stethoscope to Berger’s chest like a quack portrayed by 
Sid Caesar in the 1950s. “You almost got away from us 
that time,” he said in a poor imitation-Viennese accent. 
“Don’t do it again, okay, kiddo?” 

“Doctor,” whispered Berger weakly, “will 1 ever 
play the violin again?” 

“Why not?” 

“I never could before. ...” 

“Is that supposed to be funny?” asked the doctor, 
scowling. 

“It’s supposed to be,” said Berger. 

“Well, you’re supposed to be dead, too, how do you 
explain that?” 

“Maybe I am dead, maybe all three of us are dead.” 

The audience cheered, giving Berger the standing 
ovation he really could have lived without. 

—ROBERT E. ROGOFF 



Jiffy Thoroughthink’s 5-Star Book Review 



SEX AND THE MULTIPLE 
ALIEN 

Lucy Tragg & John Many Johns 
Bootay, NCL 45e, 1st Imperitarium, 
Level 20, BioGram Entertainment 
Systems. Copyright 7.6993771.93hf0u3. 
.Some Rights Reversed. Deathcurse for 
Unlawful Entry. 

This is one of those books you just 
can’t put down. You can send away for a 
release mechanism when you’ve completely 
scanned the entire file to end-of-line, 
already opened the book and the 
Tangleweed has hold of you and your face 
is purple with cyanotic surprise. 

To put the book down, you simply 
release the gas canister toward the more 
bloodshot of its seventy-some-odd eyes and 
press the Tangleweed’s bellybutton. 



If the creature refuses categorically to 
release its grip, simply contact the Magellan 
System Autocratic Government Department 
of Mercantile Complaints. By the time 
they’ve responded, either you or the Tangle 
will have resolved the conflict. Power to the 
victor! 

I liked the development of the material; 
putting it in chapter form was a novel 
concept, and if it doesn’t catch on, I’m no 
five-star reviewer! 

Avoid counterfeits; the Tangleweeds 
on the clone varieties are the Evilgame 
Mutations; they have no navels. 

THE EARTH MY 
DESTINATION 

Aflrei Sterbe, Gnorr Press, 
Chicaogolesyorkdelphia, Tech RE Ixxil 
state 23.5R335v Pressright (#)43 U.C., All 



Rights Reserved, Deathcurse for 
Unlawful Entry. DATACODE on 
request. 3.5 cred. 

A rather far-out contemplative piece 
from Aflrei Sterve, conceiving of some 
rather fanciful long-dead civilizations on 
some other dimension. 

“Earth” has a dominant species of 
biped hominid which has developed speech, 
some rudimentary thought, and a crude 
form of energy-handling which involves 
engines of mechanical mass. 

Not your hard science, eh, what? On 
top of that, author (sic) Sterbe postulates an 
intelligent species employing atomic power 
for warfare. Show me one intact planet 
where that happened and I’ll endorse this 
one. Otherwise, my suspension of disbelief 
doesn’t relax deeply enough for me to get 
into it, eh? 



ADVERTISEMENT 



39 






MI9T9 

•F 

9AWM 

by Chad Oliver 





A young man makes an 
unplanned trip through space 
and time to Europe 50,000 
years ago where Neanderthal 
and Cro-Magnon man engage 
in a battle for survival. 
Another in the series of 
collectible hardbound classic 
science-fiction from 
SIRIUS SCIENCE-FICTION. 
Edition limited to 125 copies - 
$225.00 each. 

1-800-869-0658 OR 916-432-1716 




•BEST DOCON SCIENCE FICTION IN THE WESTERN RIM! 

SIRIUS SCIENCE FICTION 



40 



GALAXY 




DANCES WITH ELVES 

By CYNTHIA WARD 

Illustrated by Boyd 

if Ives!” called Rooso the Anvil. “O Fair Folk, 

hear my plea! I have given up my family and 
my trade! I have given up the human world! I 
want to join you!” 

The Fair Folk were the greatest, purest, wisest 
people in the world. They lived in peace with one 
another, in accord with the spirits, and in harmony with 
nature. Where they lived, the forest bloomed all year 
with sweet-scented blossoms and sweet-tasting fruit. 
When they hunted, the animals came willingly to them. 
Sometimes, Rooso knew, they stole human babies. Fie 
did not understand why this caused the parents such 
sorrow; the Elves had given the children a gift beyond 
compare. 

Rooso the Anvil waited, but no answer to his call 
came from the surrounding forest. Finally he crouched, 
slowly, as though pressed down by the weight of the 
darkness around his small fire. Three nights and three 
days had he waited, alone in the wilderness, surviving on 
nuts and berries. He had brought no food into the forest 
and, though he was a blacksmith, he had brought no iron. 

“Why couldn’t I have been raised by the Fair Folk?” 



Rooso asked the night. He bowed his head. “O Gods,” he 
prayed, “grant me my wish, to join the first and greatest 
of Your creations.” 

When he raised his head, he found his campfire 
ringed about by seven motionless Elves. He had been 
accounted “fair as an Elf’ by the women of his town, but 
in the presence of the Elves he suddenly felt as ugly and 
gnarled as a hunchback. 

The tallest of the tall Elves spoke, in the Old 
Tongue, in a voice as clear and flowing as a stream. “We 
have heard your cries, these last three nights. Why do 
you disturb us?” 

“I called you because I wish to join you.” Rooso 
heard his voice creak like an old chair, but made himself 
continue. “I have left the world behind, in pursuit of my 
desire. You are so wise and fair, I would give anything to 
be one of you.” 

The Elves smiled at one another, a brief flash of 
teeth whiter than a human smile could ever be. 

The tallest Elf turned back to Rooso. “If you are 
willing, human, you may become one with the Elves.” 

“You know I am willing.” 

“I am known as Eagle Striking,” said the tallest Elf. 
“Put out your fire, human, and follow us.” 

Rooso emptied his waterskin, extinguishing the 
small fire. He blinked in the blackness of night. 

At dawn, the Elves led the human out of the forest, 
into a clearing overgrown with wild roses, strawberries, 
poppies, daisies, and a score of flowers Rooso did not 
recognize. In the middle of this field stood a grove of 
fruit and oak trees. The apple, pear, and cherry trees 
were bowed under the weight of fruit. The Elves dwelt 
high in the branches of the oaks, in shelters woven of 
branches and grass. Among the several score Elves who 
greeted him, Rooso saw a few children, all as quiet, 
dignified, and beautiful as the adults. He saw no human 
children — if there were changelings here, they had 
changed completely. 

The Fair Folk prepared a feast of welcome. Some 
piled wood high in the center of the grove, while others 
filled baskets with fruit and berries. Eagle Striking led 
Rooso out of the grove and deeper into the ancient forest. 
He bade Rooso stand quiet in the shadow of a shaggy 
pine. Then he drew his knife. Rooso’s heart slammed 
against his chest. Eagle Striking turned away. 

The Elf took up a position several yards from Rooso. 
He stood motionless, his white skin and butter-colored 
buckskin tunic shading into the browns and yellows of 
tree boles and fallen leaves. 

Within moments a red deer appeared, a great stag 
crowned with tined antlers. Head upraised, legs steady, 
the stag approached the Elf and stretched out its slender 
neck. Eagle Striking laid the stone knife across the 
jugular and sawed at the tough hide. When blood spurted 
like water from a fountain, Rooso felt faint, though he 
had poached the king’s deer many times. He reminded 
himself that the animal had come to Eagle Striking in 



DANCES WITH ELVES 



41 



accord with the harmony of nature. 

At the feast, Rooso the Anvil ate better than he ever 
had in his life. The venison was savory, not gamy, and 
tender as veal. As the feast progressed, a group of Elves 
chanted wild strange songs Rooso couldn’t understand 
over the bone-shaking throb of log drums. When other 
Elves rose up and made a ring around the fire, Rooso 
realized he was about to witness the legendary dance of 
the Elves. He could not believe his good fortune. He 
never expected to be invited to join them. 

He shook his head at their beckoning gestures until 
Eagle Striking left the dance and grabbed his wrist and 
dragged him to the fire. “Human, do you see the 
pattern?” 

Rooso shook his head. The pattern was far too 
complex and the drumming too fast. But the beat slowed, 
and the dancers shouted encouragement, and moved 
slowly so that he could learn. Eagle Striking pulled him 
into motion, and the drums beat fast again, and Rooso 
found himself dancing the ancient Elvish dance. 

In the morning, Rooso ate as well as he had last 
night, breakfasting on fruit, wild-pig ham, and wheat 
bread dipped in honey. He lay against a tree, his hands 
on his overfull stomach, somnolent, insensible of the 
passing hours. 

Eagle Striking came up to him and pressed a scrap of 
dried fruit into his hand. 

“I am not hungry,” Rooso said apologetically. 

“Eat this toadstool if you would see as we see,” 
Eagle Striking said. “Eat, and know the harmony of the 
world.” 

Rooso examined the toadstool, a long, dirty-looking 
white stem topped with a small, tight-fitting brown cap. 
How could this shriveled scrap give him the wisdom of 
Elves? 

He felt his stomach tremble. He quickly thrust the 
mushroom into his mouth and bit down. The stem 
snapped like an old stick. As he chewed, his saliva 
softened the mushroom, but the foul taste blotted up the 
moisture in his mouth. He swallowed with difficulty. He 
could not imagine how he could gain knowledge in this 
manner, and the attempt to imagine it made his stomach 
queasy. He calmed his mind and lay still. 

After a while he realized the trees of the grove made 
a pattern. The pattern included all the trees he could see, 
and all the trees he could not see. He understood the 
pattern of the forest: the harmony of the trees with the 
animals, with the birds that flew above, with the worms 
that burrowed below. He understood the necessity of the 
deer eating the leaves and the wolf eating the deer. He 
turned to look at the huge oak he leaned against, and 
traced the furrows in the bark, following the pattern. 
Everything was part of the pattern. Rooso the Anvil laid 
his cheek against the rough bark, spread his arms as wide 
as they could stretch, and embraced the tree. 

When evening thickened in the grove, the Elves built 
their bonfire. The human stared into the fire, watching 



the flames leap and twist in a dance as beautiful and 
meaningful as the dance of the Elves, or the pattern of 
the world. 

Rooso realized Eagle Striking stood beside him, and 
the other Elves stood close around him. Eagle Striking 
laid his hand gently on Rooso’ s shoulder. “Human, do 
you see the pattern?” 

Rooso spoke slowly. “Yes.” 

Eagle Striking asked, “Are you ready to be one with 
the Elves?” 

Rooso smiled dreamily. “I am,” he replied. 

And so the Elves cooked and ate him. 

—CYNTHIA WARD 



THE PERFUMERIE 



Time travel In a bottle... 

Voyage to the palaces of the ancients... 
where scent Is the medium of magic. 

A few of our vast selection of oils listed below 



Frankincense 

Myrrh 

Patchouli 

Rain 



White Musk 
Ylang Ylang 
Amber 

Jasmine-Orange 



Black Musk 

Magnolia 

Rose 

Sandalwood 




5lngle oils, 2.2 drams: $35.00 plus* $3.00 shipping and sales tax where 
applicable.Custom Blends from a palette of over 70 different oils, $45.00 
and up. 

THE PERFUMEPIE — PO Box 3 70. Nevada City, CA 95959 
Or call for more information. 1-B00-B69-065B 



FRANK KSILY FREAS 

ILLUSTRATOR EXTRAORDINAIRE... 

1 - 800 - 869-0658 



pOU/CR 

pouenes 



shown: 

"Acorns 




send for 
catalog 

$27.95 from Power Pouches 
POBox 370 
Nevada City CA 95959 

n/KQ 




/ ) Mixed Floral 

Bumble 
Barf 
Honey 

This jar of Bee vomit was 
packaged for your pleasure by: 

BardoTown Industries 

P.O. Box 370 
Nevada City, CA 95959 

Raw & Unprocessed 
Pure and Natural 

Net Wt. 1 lb. / 16oz. 

(we only filter out the big chunks) 



42 



GALAXY 




BAD MOON RISING 

By JAMES L. WRIGHT, JR. 

Illustrated by Needham 

he Clemens Elementary School auditorium was 
filled to capacity with proud parents who 
chatted amiably to draw their attention away 
from the uncomfortably small student seats before the 
concert began. Behind the curtains, Mrs. Strader’s 
sixth-grade choir warmed up slowly, singing “do-re-me” 
while trying not to fidget in their heavily-starched 
outfits. Mrs. Strader smiled warmly at the students, 
giving her warmest glances to those who looked 
particularly uncomfortable or nervous. 

The warmups ceased, the audience quieted, and the 
curtains rose. After the Pledge of Allegiance, the concert 
began with a rousing — and surprisingly recognizable — 
rendition of “The Star Spangled Banner.” At the 
conclusion of the national anthem, the audience 
applauded wildly. The next two numbers, “Amazing 
Grace” and the Carpenters’ “Top of the World,” were 
also well performed and well received. 

As the applause subsided, two boys stepped to the 
front of the choir to sing solos in the next number, “One 
Tin Soldier.” The two stood straight and tall — the 
dark-haired boy at stage right, more than a head taller 
than the other. He had the awkward, jumbled look of 
early puberty, but he still sported a beautiful soprano 
voice. 

The tall boy sang the first verse flawlessly; he saw 
the pride in his mother’s face and smiled as his father 



took photo after photo with the family Instamatic. The 
shorter boy sang the second verse with a slight but 
intentional vibrato that sent chills through the crowd. 
The tall boy began the third verse as perfectly as the 
first, but soon disaster struck — his voice warbled and 
dropped an octave, jumped back up, then settled on an A 
Flat somewhere in between; he tried to recover, but his 
hormones and growing embarrassment betrayed him, and 
the notes escaping his lips soon sounded completely 
random as his blue eyes welled with tears. 

At first, the audience was silent, too stunned to react. 
But the poor boy sounded so pathetic, so ridiculous, that 
eventually it got the better of everyone, including Mrs. 
Strader; they began to laugh nervously — then 
uncontrollably — as the tall boy tried desperately to 
finish, his wavering voice deteriorating even further 
through his mounting sobs of shame and humiliation. 

The boy on stage began to grow even taller, still 
singing and sobbing, as the roar of the audience 
increased. Soon he was a man, drenched in his own 
sweat and tears, overwhelmed by the deafening laughter 
of the crowd. He noticed his father put the camera away, 
his own eyes glistening. 

I awoke from the nightmare fully clothed, drenched 
to the bone, and sobbing my eyes out. It took a moment 
to realize that more than mere sweat and tears had me 
dripping; 1 had been sleeping outside, and overlapping 
arcs of sprinkler water passed over me every few 
seconds. Where was I? I rubbed the moisture from my 
face and looked around. 

As 1 scanned my surroundings between splashes of 
water, 1 realized 1 had spent the night in a park. It was 




BAD MOON RISING 



43 



light enough to see in the smoggy, purple and grey 
pre-dawn haze so common to southern California. I 
wasn’t the only park sleeper, but I was the only one who 
didn’t look like I belonged there. I saw some joggers and 
a few cars, most with their lights on, on the road a few 
dozen yards away. I still wasn’t sure, though, which park 
I was in. Long Beach had so many ... if I was in Long 
Beach. I noticed my jacket a few feet away from me, 
dark with moisture . and overflowing with money. 

I started to get up, but my muscles protested; they 
were stiff and sore, like I’d been hiking all night. I 
stretched and rubbed my arms, neck, and legs for a few 
moments before moving again. I collected the money on 
my jacket, the nightmare and my strange surroundings 
temporarily forgotten. 

I began counting the money. Forty . forty-five . 
fifty — I heard someone say, “Hey, great job last night.” 
Sixty . sixty-five — huh? I looked around, but 
whoever had spoken was gone now. I shrugged and 
resumed counting. 

I had awakened to two-hundred eighty-three dollars 
in bills and enough nickels, dimes and quarters to sink 
the Titanic. I pocketed the bills and gave the change to 
my sleeping parkmates, then walked toward the street. 
Wherever I was, at least I could afford the trip home. 

“You’ll be fine, Michael. Some bruises and 
scratches, but nothing serious. The next time you decide 
to sleep outside, however, I suggest you remember your 
sleeping bag. And sleep away from the sprinklers; you 
could catch pneumonia.” Dr. Simons frowned sternly, 
but his eyes twinkled. 

I usually hated being called Michael, but Dr. Simons 
had been our family physician since I was a kid, and it 
felt okay coming from him. It didn’t matter that I was in 
my mid-twenties, looked older, and was called “Mister” 
by most people 1 met; to him I’d always be six years old. 
In his office I usually felt that old, too, and I didn’t mind. 

“I promise, Doctor. Honest, though, I hadn’t planned 
on it. That’s why I came in; I can’t remember what 
happened last night.” I never considered calling him 
Doc; “Doctor” was a years-old habit, and any other name 
seemed disrespectful. “The last thing I remember was 
walking home from school last night.” 

“Have you had a memory loss before?” 

I shook my head. “If so, I always made it home. This 
is the first time I’ve slept somewhere strange.” The park 
was in an unfamiliar neighborhood, about two miles 
away from my apartment and a short walk from the 
lower campus of Cal State Long Beach, where I was 
working on a Master’s degree in Computer Science. 

“It’s probably nothing, but if it happens again, come 
in immediately.” Dr. Simons took a deep breath, as he 
usually did when he searched for answers to difficult 
questions; over the years, this had proven surprisingly 
effective. “But as long as you’re here,” he said, “let me 
take another look at your shoulder.” 

I had almost forgotten about my shoulder wound. I 



removed my shirt again. The month-old bite marks were 
barely visible now, but Dr. Simons had said bites from 
people had more danger of disease and infection than 
most animal bites. “It looks fine, but why don’t we run 
some more tests?” he said with soothing reassurance. I 
nodded my assent. 

I thought about my shoulder as his assistant took the 
blood samples. I’d seen Dr. Simons a month before, the 
day after I got mugged on the way home from a beach 
party in Santa Monica. At the time I felt lucky I hadn’t 
been killed; the guy had caught me from behind and 
knocked me on my back, and glared at me with fierce 
bloodshot eyes and a gaping smile that looked more 
animal than human. He tore the pocket off my shirt and 
my wallet went flying; when I reached for it, he yanked 
me upright and bit my right shoulder. 1 screamed; on 
instinct I pushed myself away from him, drew back and 
kicked hard, connecting solidly with his crotch and 
sending him reeling. My friends came running when they 
heard the screams, but by the time they reached me the 
attacker and my wallet had vanished into a dark alley. 
My roommate, Matt, had seen well enough to give a 
good description to the police; I had remembered little 
more than his eyes and hideous grin. They found my 
wallet in the alley the next day, with nothing missing and 
no fingerprints. The attacker had never been found. 

“You have a pretty voice,” the medical assistant, 
Denise, said, and I snapped back to reality. 

“Excuse me?” 

“You were humming just now, and it sounded very 
nice. I don’t know the song, though.” She started 
humming; it took a few moments for me to recognize the 
tune as “One Tin Soldier.” My stomach tightened. I had 
hated the song since sixth grade, and until last night’s 
nightmare I hadn’t heard or thought about it in years. 

“Thanks,” I whispered, hoping it sounded sincere, 
and almost certain it didn’t. 

1 went straight from the doctor’s office to school. I 
had a few hours to study before my three o’clock Data 
Structures class; Professor Lewis usually gave a quiz on 
Thursdays. At least it wouldn’t be an oral quiz. 

I woke up yelling. At least I was in my room this 
time, and the wetness of my clothing came only from 
sweat. Another nightmare, completely different from my 
childhood nightmare the previous week, but shot through 
with the same disturbing emotions. 

In my dream I was on a stage in front of a large 
group of people. I was doing — something — and the 
people in the crowd were laughing and clapping. The 
room was dark; a bright light was shining on me. I 
watched myself on the stage; I looked confident, like I 
belonged there, wanted to be there. Needed to be there. 

I felt an overwhelming sense of dread. 1 could see no 
danger; the crowd looked harmless, too happy 
responding to whatever I was doing to pose any threat. 
Even so, 1 screamed at myself to escape from the stage; I 
was certain that every second I remained in front of the 



44 



GALAXY 



crowd was terribly, unspeakably wrong. I tried 
desperately to be heard, but I had no voice, and the me 
on stage remained, oblivious to my cries. 

I didn’t know how long I had been screaming before 
I awoke. The green LED of my alarm clock read 4:12. 

I don’t know why I still feared crowds. Not being in 
one, mind you; just being the focus of one. I had dropped 
choir, given up singing, and even skipped my high 
school graduation to avoid standing in front of a group of 
people. Being the center of attention was worse than 
being boiled alive, I thought, even fifteen years after my 
puberty-induced solo-from-hell. It wasn’t that I’d 
screwed up — hell, how can you control hormones? I 
just couldn’t stand the thought of being laughed at ever 
again. That’s why I guess I’d gotten into computers in 
the first place — a machine will never laugh at you. 

My roommate knocked on my door. “You okay, 
Mikey?” 

I took a deep breath. “I’m fine. Matt,” I answered 
hoarsely. “It was just a nightmare.” 

“You’re sure?” 

“Yeah. Yeah, I’m sure. Go back to sleep.” 

I emptied the pitcher of ice water I kept on my 
nightstand in one gulp and slowly, warily, closed my 
eyes. 

When I awoke on the steps of the Cal State Long 
Beach math/science building with money falling off my 
chest, I screamed like I’d awakened next to a severed 
head. Two girls walking by dropped their books and also 
screamed, and a nearby campus security guard withdrew 
his baton and ran toward me. It took several minutes of 
talking and some of the money that had fallen onto the 
steps to convince them to leave me alone. I was fine, I 
insisted. 

If I could only convince myself. 

It had been several weeks since I’d awakened in the 
park. I hadn’t dreamed that night, which in itself was a 
small relief — I’d had many nightmares in the past 
month. I had stayed at school late the day before, 
finishing a project for Compiler Design. But after that . 

. I could remember nothing. 1 gathered the money around 
me — only eighty bucks this time, I discovered with 
some disappointment — and went to the phone in the 
snack area to call Dr. Simons. 

“You want me to whatT Matt was looking at me 
like I had asked him to take me to the Prom — no anger, 
but some apprehension. He’d been suffering too; my 
nightmares were becoming more frequent, and my 
screams were getting to him. I finally pitched in to buy 
him some ear plugs. 

“I’m scared, okay? I want someone with me if it 
happens again.” 

“If what happens again, Mikey?” 

“I wish I knew, Matt. 1 want a witness. Or a 
designated driver.” Matt laughed loudly; we both knew I 
didn’t drink. “It may be the only way to figure out 



what’s happening to me.” 

Dr. Simons had been unable to find anything wrong. 
Technically, nothing was wrong, aside from the 
nightmares and waking up in strange places with more 
money than memory. I was determined that if it 
happened again, I would have a witness to whatever I 
couldn’t remember on my own. 

“But why now? It’s been almost a month.” 

“It seems to happen every month or so. If it happens 
again, it’ll be soon.” 

“You’re overreacting. It’s probably nothing.” His 
voice gave away the lie. He wanted my nightmares to 
end too, if only to give him a decent night’s sleep. 

“ Nothing is what I know,” I said, my voice rising. 
“Look, I’ll pay for everything. Besides, we haven’t done 
much together lately. If you want, we can call Stacey and 
Lisa, and we’ll double.” 

Matt thought about it for a second, then smiled. 
“Well, as long as you’re buying ...” he laughed, and I 
joined in. 

“Just don’t get too weird on me, okay?” he said. 

“I promise,” I said, crossing my heart, and hoping I 
could keep it. 

Five days later I woke up in my room; the alarm was 
buzzing, as usual, at 7:05 a.m. So far, so good, I thought 
as my head cleared; just a couple more days and the 
month will be gone. And no nightmares the night before. 
I turned on the light and reached for my water jug. 

There was a small pile of cash on the nightstand. 

Ten seconds later I was pounding on Matt’s bedroom 
door. 

“Wake up!” I yelled. I tried, unsuccessfully, to 
remember the night before. Please , Matt , have something 
to tell me ... 

Matt believed life begins at ten a.m. Wake him up 
before then, and your life ends. “What?” he mumbled 
through the door, sleep still firmly in control. 

“What happened last night?” I shouted. 

An unintelligible mumble. Then silence. Then a soft 
snore. 

“MATT!!” 1 kicked the door hard; something hit the 
floor, and Matt cursed loudly. “Talk to me, dammit! 
What happened last night?” 

“You were unbelievable. Gimme five more minutes, 
please? It was a long night ...” I heard a yawn, then 
more snoring. 

Further pounding did no good. At least Matt had 
been there to see it; I would get some answers soon. I 
went to the kitchen to make coffee and add up my latest 
windfall. An absurd thought popped into my head 
between sips: “You too can make money in your 
sleep....” I spewed coffee and laughed uncontrollably for 
several minutes before I managed to calm down. 

When Matt finally made it to the kitchen, he told me 
everything. “We were walking out of Alondra 6 — 

“I thought we were going to the Angels game," I 



BAD MOON RISING 



45 



interrupted. 

“We couldn’t get tickets, so we watched Aladdin 
instead. Anyway, as we left the theater you started doing 
bits from it. I mean, whole bits. Voices and everything.” 

“Whose voices?” 

“All of ‘em. Bird, genie, bad guy, boy, girl, 
everyone. And you were doing ‘em perfect, too. Then 
you started doing stuff that wasn’t in the show, with the 
same voices. The people in line for tickets started 
watching us, and you really got off on it, started joking 
around with them. It was like we were at the Improv or 
something, Mikey; you were like Robin Williams out 
there.” 

I stared at him, unable to speak. 

He shook his head, smiling. “Normally you’re scared 
outta your shorts in front of people — don’t lie, I 
remember graduation. Last night, though . you 
surprised the hell outta me. Those people were laughing 
themselves sick, and you looked like you were having 
the time of your life.” 

“You’re kidding,” I managed to squeak out. 

“Sorry, dude. You told me to tell you if you did 
anything strange, and last night couldn’t get much 
stranger. Not in a bad way, though; it was great seeing 
you have so much fun. It’s about time, if you ask me.” 

I had trouble swallowing my toast; I took a long sip 
of coffee, and burned my tongue. “Wh-what happened 
next?” 

Matt ate a spo'spful of Grape Nuts and took 
infuriatingly long to swallow. “Some people in line gave 
you their ticket money to keep you there. One old guy 
said, ‘Screw Oliver Stone; this boy’s worth seven bucks.’ 
You went on for like a half an hour, until the theater 
people asked us to leave. Someone in line gave me his 
card and said I should take you to Igby’s. He told me, 
‘Tell Casey I sent you, and he’ll give your friend some 
stage time.’” 

“Matt, this isn’t funny. The Igby’s?” Igby’s was one 
of the best comedy clubs in southern California. 

“That’s the one. I almost crashed twice on the way, 
you had me laughing so hard. Casey saw the card and 
gave you a few minutes at the late show. Man, you 
killed. The headliner — he did that HBO special last 
month — refused to follow you. You did more than an 
hour up there; Casey was so impressed he gave you a 
hundred bucks and offered you a spot on Monday night.” 

In the pile of money on my nightstand I had found 
two crisp fifty-dollar bills. I started to feel nauseous. 
“This can’t be happening ...” I said, mostly to myself. 

“Mikey, I know you hate crowds. But cross my 
heart, you were addicted to them last night; you were a 
comedy machine. Hell, maybe it was just a case of Full 
Moon Fever. Whatever it was, I hope I’m there next time 
you do it. I haven’t laughed so hard in my life.” 

I stared at him while he concentrated on his cereal. It 
was too incredible to believe, but still . The 
nightmares, the nagging elementary school memory, the 
incessant cadence of “One Tin Soldier” .... What did he 



mean by Full Moon Fever? 

“Matt?” I asked. “Was it a full moon last night?” 

“Mmm-hmmm,” he mumbled through his Grape 
Nuts. 

I ran into the bedroom and grabbed my Day Timer. I 
looked at the day before ... it was a full moon. I paged 
back to the night before I’d awakened on the school 
steps. Also a full moon. Back another month to the 
morning in the park. Three-for-three. 

My hands were trembling. I paged back to the night I 
was mugged. The Day Timer fell to the floor, and I soon 
followed. 

As I screamed, a poem repeated itself in my mind, 
like a mantra of the damned: 

Even a man who ’s pure of heart 
And says his prayers at night 

May become a Comic when the wolfsbane blooms 
And the moon is full and bright. 

I vaguely remembered paramedics strapping me into 
a stretcher and injecting me with something, and the 
world going black. While I was out, I dreamed. I was on 
a stage again, which bore a striking resemblance to the 
one at Igby’s. I was talking and smiling and screaming 
happily and gesturing, and the crowd applauded wildly 
and cheered and convulsed with laughter. I saw the 
crowd through my on-stage eyes; 1 noticed myself in the 
audience, shouting at me to stop, as I had in prior 
dreams. But I wouldn’t — couldn’t — stop. Then I saw 
the me on stage from the me in the crowd, and my soul 
froze; I had the fierce eyes, and the hellish wolf-like 
grin, of the mugger at Santa Monica beach. 

When I awoke, screaming, I was strapped into a 
hospital bed. Matt and Dr. Simons were standing nearby. 

I burst into tears. “Doc, what’s happening to me?” 
Did I just say “Doc”? That was a first. Dr. Simons 
noticed this as well. 

“We don’t know, Michael. Matthew told me what 
happened last night. That isn’t at all like you.” 

My temples throbbed; the tears stopped, and I saw 
red. “Oh, brilliant deduction, Watson,” I said, my voice 
dripping sarcasm. “You been sharing Sherlock’s needle 
again?” The instant I said it, I turned pale and ached to 
take the words back. 

Dr. Simons stiffened; 1 couldn’t have hurt him more 
with a blunt instrument. 1 saw a twenty-year relationship 
falling apart in an instant. “Doctor, I’m sorry,” I said 
weakly, but he was walking out the door. 

Matt looked at me in shock. “That was cold, Mike.” 
Matt looked up to Dr. Simons as much as I did. 

“Honest, Matt, I didn’t mean it.” I tried choking back 
tears. “I swear 1 didn’t mean it.” The tears won, and my 
whole body shook, rattling the bed frame. My world was 
falling apart; whether it was lack of sleep or lunacy or 
rabies, 1 didn’t know or care; 1 just wanted it to end. 

Matt’s look softened. “I know. I’ll go talk to him.” 
He left the room, and I surrendered to the tears until 
sleep reclaimed me. 



46 



GALAXY 



Dr. Simons was almost as quick to forgive as Matt. 
Matt stopped by frequently and stayed for hours, and 
managed to avoid talking about our “night on the town.” 
At least with me. I knew he was telling someone, though; 
before I left, half the hospital was calling me Robin 
Williams Jr. Igby’s made a habit of taping its shows, and 
a copy of my performance had somehow been passed 
around. The reviews were glowing. 

This did not cheer me up. 

After two days. Dr. Simons decided I was “stable” 
and authorized my release. Matt drove me home from 
the hospital; his car stereo was tuned to the classic rock 
station, as usual, but the volume was turned way down so 
we could talk. John Fogerty was singing “Centerfield.” 
“Back to the apartment?” he asked. “Lisa made a 
cake. We can invite a few people, watch a video ...” I 
bristled. “You know, some obscure depressing French 
film. Or maybe an action flick.” 

“Thanks, but my parents want me to stay with them 
for a while.” 

“That’s cool. So what happens next?” 

I shrugged. “They should get the tests back in a few 
days; they’re checking for everything this time. And they 
reserved an observation room for me the next full 
moon.” I laughed bitterly. “You could be famous, Matt. 
Your best friend is a werewolf.” 

Matt laughed too. “ Were-comic sounds better. You 
didn’t sprout hair, you just got damned funny. I can think 
of worse diseases.” 

“Yeah, but I’m only funny on a full moon.” I tried to 
laugh. “Well, at least I can pick up some extra cash every 
lunar month.” 

“Speaking of extra cash . you still on for Igby’s 
tomorrow night?” 

I saw red again. I wanted to bite him. I mean, hit 
him. “There’s no way in — ” 

“Sorry. How about if we go and watch the show?” 

I was about to protest, but decided against it. I sighed 
and nodded. “Just to watch, okay?” 

“You got it. I’ll call them tonight.” 

“Centerfield” ended, and the deejay announced the 
next song, “Bad Moon Rising.” 

“Hey, they’re playing our song!” Matt said with a 
goofy smile that quickly faded at my expression. He 
turned off the radio quickly and we drove in silence the 
rest of the way home. 

Casey was disappointed but understanding; he gave 
us complimentary tickets to the early show. Fortunately, 
Casey said, there were literally thousands of comics in 
L.A. begging for stage time, and filling my spot — even 
on such short notice — wouldn’t be difficult. 

We took a front row table, over my objections. I 
looked around before the show started; I had no memory 
of performing here, and the thought of doing so knotted 
my stomach. The room was huge. 

The emcee was a celebrity, the co-star of a 



recently-canceled sitcom. He talked a lot about his old 
show, and begged campily for any producers in the 
audience to take pity on him. He wasn’t very funny, and 
the crowd response was lukewarm. 

The opening act I recognized from HBO comedy 
specials and Comic Strip Live; she was hilarious, and I 
laughed a lot, momentarily forgetting my troubles. The 
audience loved her; she did close to a half hour of 
material, most of which I’d never heard before. 

“And now, ladies and gentlemen,” said the emcee 
after the crowd gave the opener yet another round of 
applause, “please welcome to the stage with a big hand, 
the Rottweiler of Comedy . Johnny Gonzo! ! !” 

I’d never heard of him, but the crowd went wild. 
Matt and I looked at each other and shrugged, then 
applauded. 

When the man leaped to the stage and grabbed the 
microphone, my blood froze. 

“Hey,” Matt whispered, “he looks familiar . .” 
Then he gasped as recognition set in. “Damn . I didn’t 
know comedy was contagious.” 

I nearly hit him until I saw his expression; he wasn’t 
trying to be funny. In fact, he was trembling, staring in 
horror at the man at the mike. At the bloodshot eyes and 
feral grin of the Rottweiler of Comedy. 

Johnny Gonzo began his act, and the audience 
responded enthusiastically. Matt and I were too busy 
watching the guy with fear and loathing to listen. I didn’t 
know whether to run away or jump onto the stage and 
beat him to death. The last three months were starting to 
make sense. 

Sitting on the front row of a comedy club and not 
laughing is like wearing a target to a firing range. 
Eventually the comic noticed us. 

“Hey, here’s a party table! What’s wrong, boys? You 
need a translator? How ‘bout a Buttweed-to-English 
dictionary?” The crowd laughed. 

“I ... I, uh ...” I stammered. 

“I . I, uh . ” he mimicked with a sneer. ‘“I, uh’ 
what? Ayatollah?” Loud laughter. People often laugh 
because it’s funny. They also laugh when it’s someone 
other than them being picked on. 

I wasn’t laughing. I was too busy stammering. 

“I, uh . ” 

“ . been working on the railroad? What are you 
trying to say?” 

CCJ » 

The guy on stage pointed at us with a sweeping 
gesture. “Ladies and gentlemen, the Idaho delegation of 
Mensa is with us tonight! Give them a hand!” Laughter, 
rebel yells, and applause. 

The comic picked on us some more, then went on 
with his act. My heart was pounding, pumping 
adrenaline throughout my system. I felt like I'd been 
violated by him. Again. 

Something snapped in my head; it was like a door 
being blown apart from the inside. 1 lurched forward in 



BAD MOON RISING 



47 



my seat as a wave of memories washed forcefully 
through my consciousness, sloshing around and 
demanding immediate attention. 

The night in the park ... on campus . outside the 
movie theater. Even here in Igby’s. I saw myself dancing 
around, waving my arms, making faces, cracking jokes. I 
heard the laughter of the people watching me. I saw the 
money thrown at my feet, heard the applause, felt the 
handshakes and hugs of appreciation — and the eager 
lips and probing tongues of groupie lust. I saw myself 
sinking down in exhaustion as the people walked away 
smiling, as if their very presence gave me my strength 
and their departure robbed me of it. Some staggered 
away and tried to recover their breath as I lost 
consciousness where I stood, only to awake the next 
morning, oblivious to what I’d done or been. 

Making people laugh ... it was a good thing, wasn’t 
it? Tonight’s opener had made me forget my troubles for 
a time. Why shouldn’t I be happy to have sent so many 
away laughing? As my mind sorted through the 
memories, I saw that some of my jokes had been cruel, 
and I recalled seeing more than one pained look. A few 
jokes had been directed at faces in the crowd, targeting 
them as if I were exacting vengeance for some past 
wrong. Some of these bystanders had familiar faces, 
similar to ones I remembered from that elementary 
school concert. I replayed my cruel behavior in detail; 
it’s as if I was fighting for the right to be the focus of 
attention again, erasing my childhood humiliation one 
teardrop at a time. 

I hated myself for these attacks. And I hated the man 
on stage who had done this to me. 

Johnny Gonzo decided to notice us again. I didn’t 
realize I was blushing. “You really need to lower the 
octane level of those drinks, Gomer; I could fry eggs on 
your forehead.” He smiled sappily, said, “Golly!” 
drunkenly, and the audience roared. He had no reason to 
expect me to respond any better than I had last time. 

The first time he’d attacked me in Santa Monica, I 
was caught off guard. The second time, from the stage, I 
was in shock. Now, though, my mind was working on all 
cylinders, and 1 wanted blood. 

“When’s the last time you had your shots, Cujo?” 1 
asked loudly. His sneer faded. A couple of people 
laughed, but 1 ignored them. I locked my gaze on Gonzo; 

I was determined to make him suffer. I felt some shame 
for this desire, but my fury was in firm control. 

The battle had begun. 

“Ooooh,” he said sarcastically. “Gomer’s a heckler! 
Gonna throw spuds at the stage now?” 

1 smiled. “You know, 1 find it amazing that of all 
those millions of sperm . you won. I can only imagine 
it was a mercy fertilization.” THWACK! He stepped 
back as if struck. The audience roared. 

“Hey pal,” he said nervously, “I don’t give you a 
rough time at your job when you’re giving your 
customers their McChange ...” Sporadic laughter. 

“You should really consider wearing turtlenecks. 



Johnny,” I said, “to hide those circumcision scars.” Some 
enthusiastic groans, and even more cheers. They were on 
my side now; I felt a fresh rush of adrenaline. Getting 
laughs wasn’t so bad, and I had Gonzo on the ropes. 

He was speechless. His face went blank. “I, uh . ” 
he stammered. 

“I, uh, whatl ” I shot back. “Iawatha? Yer Honor, I 
uhbject!” The audience howled. I relished the irony of 
using his own joke against him, and the laughter was 
intoxicating. I looked over to Matt’s seat, but he was 
gone. 

Gonzo’s eyes blazed with a mix of terror and fury; 
his lips curled and his teeth ground together as he 
clenched the microphone like a bludgeon. He didn’t even 
look human anymore; he more closely resembled a 
cornered animal. It was the look he had given me after 
he’d knocked me down three months before, and I felt a 
momentary chill before my own rage reasserted itself. 

“You wouldn’t recognize a joke if it bit you on the 
ass,” he growled. Nobody laughed. A few people booed. 
He weakened visibly. 

“No, but I’d recognize the ass who bit me on the 
shoulder,” I snapped back, smiling demonically. “You 
still singing soprano, Cujo?” 

Every vestige of arrogance fled his face; I noted the 
pure terror with satisfaction as recognition set in. 
“You’re . you’re the guy — ” 

“You screwed up my life, Johnny,” I said. I stood. 
“And now it’s my turn.” 

I imitated Sylvester Stallone: “I’m your worst 
nightmare.” Some laughter from the crowd; the 
professional drinkers in the audience were now 
completely sauced and determined to laugh at 
everything. I did another Stallone impression: “You’re 
the disease, and I’m the cure.” More sporadic laughter. I 
looked around; many people looked confused, but a few 
seemed to think we were a tag-team act. 

Johnny Gonzo started crying. “I’m sorry, man . 
I’m so sorry ...” Heavy sobs. “I used to be a teacher. I 
got bit a couple years ago in Phoenix, and next thing I 
know I’m on the road performing. Four months ago 1 . 
I just went crazy. I’m sorry . I’m sorry ...” 

1 wanted so much to hate him, but my anger was 
rapidly draining away. If what he was saying was true, 
he was a victim like me. Could I blame him for attacking 
me? Might as well get pissed off at a mosquito for 
feeding off your blood while you slept. I looked at the 
weeping figure on the stage, and our eyes met again; this 
time, I felt no fear, no fury . only understanding. The 
look in his eyes now matched those I’d seen in the mirror 
almost every day the past several months. 

“I’m sorry too,” I said sincerely. “It’s not your fault 
you’re a comic.” I had no more anger in me, and now 
that 1 knew what was going on my fear diminished. 

Matt entered the room with three police officers; he 
pointed towards the stage. They took the weeping Gonzo 
away in handcuffs as the shocked audience watched. 
Someone at the back of the room shouted, “Bravo!” and 



48 



GALAXY 



started applauding as if Johnny Gonzo and I were doing 
Hamlet shtick; did he honestly think this was part of the 
show? 

Hell, why not? 

I jumped on the stage, grabbed the microphone, 
bowed theatrically and announced in a Dodger Stadium 
Public Address System voice, “Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Elvis has left the building!” I pointed to the exit through 
which the police and Gonzo had left. The guy in back 
howled his approval. 

“Howdy, folks,” I said. “My name is Mike McNeal, 
and I’m your real headliner for tonight. Johnny and I 
planned this; normal intros are so boring and besides — 
let’s face it — the emcee sucks.” More laughter as I 
impersonated the emcee as his television character, using 
some of his best-known tag lines. The emcee, standing in 
the doorway, winced and grinned sheepishly. “The cops 
came in when things started to drag; hell, it always 
worked for Monty Python.” More laughter, and a few 
Arsenio-style woofs. The drunks were happy again. I 
basked in the attention. 

“How about a big round of applause,” I shouted, “for 
the Rottweiler of Comedy, Johnny Gonzo?” Loud 
applause. “Bring him back in, guys!” I shouted, and the 
police dragged Johnny in — confused, but no longer 
sobbing — for a quick bow. I decided then to not press 
charges against him. We needed to have a long talk; I 
had to find out what 1 was in for. The uncertainty of what 
had happened to me was gone, but the future still scared 
me.... 

But first, the present. There were people to entertain. 
I noticed Casey as he gave me a thumbs-up. 

“Sit back, folks; the show has just begun. Johnny 
will get his booster shots and be back tomorrow night, as 
rowdy and rabid as ever.” Cheers. I was grinning like a 
madman. 

“Some of you still have that look on your face like, 
‘is this Greek Tragedy night?’” I put the microphone 
close to my mouth and in an announcer’s voice intoned, 
“Tonight on Masterjoke theater, Oedipus kills the 
headliner, marries the opener and fathers the emcee 
before dying tragically from a shorted-out microphone.” 
I then faked electrocution and fell on the stage, 
launching into a long soliloquy in Classic style on the 
horrors of comedy inbreeding before gasping my last. 

I didn’t know if it made sense, but they were 
laughing. 

I hopped back up, Bruce Lee style. “We need to get 
that Kumbaya feeling back here, people, so follow 
along.” I started chanting in a low voice, “comedy, 
comedy, co-me-dy.” My right arm — the wounded 
shoulder was throbbing now — churned in a steady 
rhythm to the words. I continued until the audience was 
chanting along, and 1 pumped up the volume until the 
pictures on the walls rattled. Jay Leno’s headshot shook 
loose and fell to the floor. When everyone was chanting 
in unison I let loose with a howl that pierced through the 
racket, and soon they were howling too. They were in the 



palm of my hand; everyone knew it, and loved it. 

“There’s a bad moon rising, folks, and what’s his 
name?” 

“MIKEY!” they shouted. More howling. 

And then the show really began. 

I conjured comedy routines from thin air; 1 told 
jokes, did impressions, sang silly songs. I told them of 
my horrific elementary school choir experience, 
exaggerating beyond belief, even improvising a parody 
of “One Tin Soldier” — mocking my childhood 
nightmare, purging my soul of that festering demon 
forever. As I told the story, I found myself laughing 
along. I was free! Twenty years of anguish and denial 
now filtered through a comic lens and dissipated into 
harmless memory. A crowd had once laughed at the 
child, and wounded me; a crowd now laughed for the 
man, and made me whole. 

The jokes and the laughter became a part of me, 
woven inextricably into my DNA. I knew I would never 
forget this night, and even sleep could not steal these 
memories from me as they had three times before. The 
crowd laughed, cheered and applauded, the earlier 
tension. in the room forgotten. 

My jokes were not so cruel now; my rage and fear 
were gone, washed away in a tidal wave of goodwill. 
Yes, I picked on people in the crowd, using a bald head, 
a cowboy hat or a loud sweater to launch into a new 
routine, but not maliciously; every victim laughed along, 
their faces registering no injury, able to enjoy their 
participation in the intricate symphony of mirth. 

Only the crowd mattered. Their energy flowed into 
me; my blood churned and boiled like the base of 
Niagara Falls, and I ached to please them, to feed off 
their adulation until they went home satisfied and 1 sank 
to the floor torpid from the feast. Their laughter 
nourished me, sustained me. Iocor ergo sum ; 1 joke, 
therefore I am. 

I couldn’t imagine not performing for the rest of my 
life. All I could think of was the next laugh, and my only 
fear was that it wouldn’t come. 

—JAMES L. WRIGHT, JR. 





SACRIFICE 



49 




SACRIFICE 

By L. S. SILVERTHORNE 

Illustrated by Hart 

atana slipped into the thick burgundy dress. 
Of all her dresses, this one would be the best 
for dying. She glanced out the window for a 
moment, watching red dust swirl across the ridge and 
disappear in an umber puff. There she would await the 
dragon — and sacrifice her life for her people. For eight 
cycles of the sun, the silvery white creature had preyed 
on the city, reducing sandstone dwellings — and anyone 
in the way — to ash. It would take the turn of many suns 
to build up the herds again and to bury all the dead. 
Seemed like a lifetime since Zand had shoved her ahead 
of him into the street as the great dragon surged across 
the sky in a blue-white streak. She had heard his scream 
and the roar of flame, but when the red dust twisted up 
into the sky, their home was nothing but gray ash. 
Yesterday, she had scattered Zand's ashes across the 
ridge. He would be with her tonight when she faced the 
dragon. The dry, rough scent of the knitted fabric made 
her eyes water and her skin itch. Zand had given her this 
dress. For traveling, he had said. The heavy material 
prevented the chilly sand showers from pocking her skin, 
protecting her until — Yes, this was a dress for dying. 

When the sun fell away from the amber sky, Matana 
rushed out into the frigid night air. Quickly, she draped 



a thick gray scarf over her head and across her mouth. 
The cold wind swished across the brick red sands, 
erasing the whisper of her footsteps. She held the scarf 
tighter against her face and made her way over the ridge, 
envying those disappearing steps in the sand. They 
slipped away in silence, leaving no past and no future. 

Beyond the ridge, a stretch of brittle sandstone, 
scorched by the dragon’s fire, broke through the smooth 
sands like a fractured bone. She toed a circle that had 
been burned into the stone and a cold shiver arced 
through her body, chilling sweat-laden skin. Her heart 
pulsed and she prayed that it would just stop. Many 
times, her people had tried to stop the dragon’s 
destruction, but every time, they were turned to ash in 
moments. The dragon never paused to hear their cries of 
mercy. It just destroyed. The apathetic creature with 
large blank eyes and twitching pupils simply destroyed. 

Last night, in the square, there had been talk of a 
sacrifice, but when no one volunteered, they decided to 
face the creature together. The whole town would face it 
one last time. Matana had embraced the idea of sacrifice 
in silence. Zand would have been pleased by her 
decision. Her people would be angry at first, but that 
would pass if her life appeased the dragon’s appetite. 
Tonight, as it had done for several cycles, it would circle 
the city, swoop down to burn and destroy, and then shoot 
back into the air, spewing fire. Even now, the smell of 
burnt grain lingered on the sands and in the air. She 
knew it would come back tonight. And she would be 
ready. With two rocks anchored firmly in her fingers. If 




GALAXY 



she could blind it, even while it killed her, perhaps she 
could save the city. 

For a long while, she stood on the edge of a thick 
black scorch mark and waited, waited for the stark white 
dragon to soar through the sky toward the ridge. Without 
warning, the ground began to rumble. Cold fear numbed 
her fingertips and her heart pressed against her throat as 
she stretched her hands toward the sky. She would be 
with Zand soon. Soon, but she would try to take this 
creature with her. With a deafening roar, the white 
dragon sizzled across the sky. Abruptly, a screech 
rippled through the silence and Matana dug her heels 
into the ground/ dread pressing against her body. It 
sounded like a great wind and Matana closed her eyes, 
hoping the creature would kill her swiftly. Already, she 
felt its blistering heat rolling across the ground. She drew 
back her arm and let the first rock fly. 

“Roger, Houston . approaching landing site.” The 



Work Space Gallery 

P.O. Box 126 
New Paltz, NY 12561 
(914)255-2088 

MACRODIMFNSIONAl MATTING 
PHANTASMAGORIC PHRAMING 
PHOR YOUR SCI-FI ARTWORK 

Cosznoidlo Ceramics 

and special 

"weMSiecK: 25 ycabs 

AS ALieN IIANCeiT" 

T-Shirts 




FREE CATALOG 
(310) 329-6772 
FAX 538-9208 




3754 W 170th St., Torrance, CA 90504-1204 



anxious astronaut surveyed the dusty ridge ahead, eager 
to land. He would be one of the first humans to set foot 
on Mars. “The eight probe sweeps we did of the area 
confirm our long range scans ... if there’s life here, 
we’re within meters of it.” 

A sharp crack echoed through the ship. One of the 
astronauts watched as the small satellite receiver 
snapped off. 

“Houston, we’ve lost visuals!” 

A metallic crunch followed and the radar winked 

out. 

“Radar’s gone. We’re going down hard, Houston! 
Repeat, we’re going down hard.” 

As the nose of the ship gouged into the ground, the 
astronaut shuddered at the thought of being one of the 
first humans to die on Mars. 

— L.S. SILVERTHORNE 




SYRUP OF GREEP 



51 




SYRUP OF GREEP 

By GREG COSTIKYAN 

Illustrated by Valencia 

J t seems so long ago that I roamed the hills of 
Hamster-Dzorzia. The world was young then, soft 
spring winds wafting eastward with the hint of rain, 
young flowers nodding in the meadows, the greeps 
putting forth their first green fruit. There were winters. 
And scorching days. And hours of labor totting up 
figures in dusty rooms. But that isn’t what sticks in the 
memory. It’s the skirl of pipes, the coolness of the 
gloaming, the scent of new greep-blossoms. 

Here and there, about the land, traces of elven magic 
lingered. There was power slowly dying with the elves’ 
absence, but still enough to support the greep. 

And its fruit; ah, its fruit. If you haven’t tasted fresh, 
new-plucked greep right off the vine, you have no 
inkling of nirvana! Tart, but not too tart; sweet, but not 
too sweet. 

The greep is a delicate fruit, and perishes quickly. It 
must be preserved, then pickled, jellied and bottled. You 
can get greep vinegar, greep schnapps — and what 
household doesn’t have a pot of greep syrup? 

My father was a haute bourgeois , a trader in greep. 
He shipped it fresh by fast pony, to Hamsterburg, where 
gourmets dined on its exquisite flesh. There was great 
demand for greep. Among true connoisseurs, it’s 
well-known that different soils breed different taste: 
greep grown by a magic spring tastes of the cool 
freshness of the waters, while those grown where a 



basilisk nests have a pungent, earthy scent. My father 
was always on the lookout for magical places where the 
greep could grow, for each new site meant a slightly 
different taste — a new variety for his demanding 
clientele. 

I saw him seldom; he was constantly on his rounds, 
and paused only briefly in the little market village we 
called home. 

It was his absence that gave me my freedom. I was 
sixteen, that spring. On a soft spring morning, I would 
sneak away from my chamber, before the hour at which I 
was required to meet my tutor, and roam the hills. 

Often I would meet Rudy; he had a quality of sober 
joy I found ceaselessly fascinating, a keen intelligence he 
applied to our amusement, and a reckless daring that 
kept me in awe. In the best of circumstances, I think he 
would have wound up dead, or imprisoned, for he was 
sort of boy who would steal the clappers from the bells 
of the town clock, make off with women’s clothes while 
they bathe, and casually pocketed merchandise while the 
shopkeeper looks elsewhere; not, I think, the sort of boy 
who would make a success of himself in the sober world. 

We would climb the hills, swim in the streams, taunt 
bulls, play jokes and otherwise amuse ourselves. His 
skin was fair, his arms speckled with a light golden 
down, his face chiseled in such exquisite lines that, more 
than once, despite our friendship, I was overwhelmed by 
shyness in his presence, a diffidence his sudden grin 
would instantly shatter. Together, we roamed the 
spring-soft hills, and took pleasure in each other as 
young friends will. 

One of our favorite places was an oak grove, down 
in the fold between two hills, where a little stream ran. 




52 



GALAXY 



The stream marked the boundary between two peasants’ 
property, which was why the grove had not been felled 
to make room for crops. Perhaps also — superstitious as 
peasants often are — they sensed some power lurking 
there. 

The tall oaks dated from as long ago as the age of 
elven dominion. The ground was carpeted with soft leaf 
mold, dotted with harder acorns. The trees abounded 
with squirrels, chipmunks, and various birds who 
survived on the mast the oaks produced; it was a 
veritable little forest, one of the last great stands of trees, 
nestled amidst acres and acres of cultivated land. Even in 
the hottest days of summer, the high branches of the 
trees cast a cool, green shade within the grove, a shade 
we found inviting. Often, in the afternoon, we’d go there, 
drink at the stream, make a rude lunch of bread and 
cheese, and lie together, sending our imaginations 
soaring outward beyond the distant stars in the green 
dimness of the grove. 

After dinner, I went out into the gloaming. The sky 
had turned that strange indigo color that painters try so 
hard to capture on canvas — the luminous fading of the 
light, a time magical and glimmering in the unknown. I 
knew the grove as a place of green dimness, but in this 
already-dim light, it now seemed dark, mysterious. As I 
entered, 1 heard the sound of voices: Rudy’s, and — a 
girl’s. 

Surprised that he would bring a wench to our private 
place, I crept softly toward the stream, hiding behind the 
trees. And there was Rudy with — with a creature. Oh, 
female, to be sure; but hardly human. Her skin was 
pastel viridian, her hair bedecked with long, fine, 
willow-like leaves, her eyes of a definite elven cast. She 
moved with a catlike litheness, and she and Rudy were 
obviously entranced. 

Astonished, I could hardly move, but watched — 
crouching behind the bole of an oak — while they 
murmured to each other, Rudy mustering the full force 
of his enormous charm. It hardly seemed necessary, for 
her intentions matched his, and by the time full darkness 
fell, they were in each others’ arms. It was new moon’s 
darkness in the oak grove, the trees obscuring the meager 
star-light. I saw little, and after a while, heard only their 
soft breathing. 

I stumbled away, half in pain, half in rage. Rudy had 
defiled our place, had defiled what we had together, and 
had done it, moreover, with a creature not even of our 
own kind. Why did I react with such intensity? It is hard 
to say why, now, so long after. Certainly, Rudy had had 
wenches before; he was a careless, charming lad, of 
respectable family, and had induced many of the local 
girls to spend an hour or two with him, in a hayloft, or 
amid the soft greenery of the meadow. And that had 
never bothered me, for I had known that they meant 
nothing to Rudy, nothing more than an afternoon’s 
pleasure, nothing by comparison to what we shared. But 
this — I sensed, even from that moment — this was 
different. 



And it was. He grew distant; the intimacy we had 
shared was gone. He never once mentioned his elven 
lover, but I could see her swimming in his eyes, his 
attention far off; he’d gather wildflowers and take them 
to the grove. He’d bring nuts and berries for the squirrels 
and lie there, his back to an oak tree, for hours at a time, 
staring upward into the leaves and sighing. It was clear, 
not only in his actions, but in his lack of action, his 
unwillingness to roam with me, to play the games that 
were our wont, that he’d been thoroughly captivated by 
that creature, enraptured in her spell, and what we had 
once shared was gone forever. 

I began to hate him as only one whose love has been 
betrayed can hate; to hate him nearly as much as I 
loathed that inhuman, green thing with which he lay. 
That was when I began to plot my revenge. 

The greep grows only in magical soil, and even in 
Hamster-Dzorzia, there were few enough places where it 
could be grown. Fell those few trees, and the grove 
would be a perfect place for a stand of vines — rich, 
bottom land, well-watered by the stream, the soil imbued 
with magic. Moreover, none of the greep orchards from 
which my father bought were planted in a dryad’s former 
grove; the taste of greeps planted there would differ, 
would provide my father with a new variety with which 
to titillate the jaded palates of even the urbs. 

And as it happened, father was home. 

I told him what I knew. Not of Rudy, nor what had 
passed between him and the dryad; but of her presence, 
of the grove’s power. My father slapped me on the back 
and, I think, for the first time in my life, he was proud of 
me. Merchant that he was, he began at once to ponder 
how best to acquire the property, how to obtain it from 
the peasants who tilled the adjoining fields without 
alerting them to its value. 

I slept soundly that night, savoring my victory. If I 
couldn’t have Rudy, I could betray him just as I had been 
betrayed. The next day, I met him on the hill overlooking 
the town, and told him what I’d done. 

All color drained from his face. “No,” he said, “you 
couldn’t have!” When I insisted I had, and provided 
corroborating detail, he struck me full on the face, a 
sudden vicious blow. I had not expected it, and it flung 
me to the ground. I lost consciousness for a while, and 
when I awoke, found a reddening bruise about one eye. 

That very afternoon, I went out to the grove in the 
company of my father, with two woodsmen and a 
sorcerer, the latter to protect us if the dryad proved to 
have unexpected powers, and the woodsmen to begin to 
fell the grove. They set to work on the outer trees, while 
I went with my father inward, to show him the stream, 
the largest oak wherein, I thought, the dryad made her 
home — 

Oh, what dolor greeted us there. Where there had 
been green coolness was warm blood, black in the 
darkness of the grove. And there was cold grey steel 
driven through Rudy’s belly, his pale flesh lifeless upon 
the moss growing beneath the tree. I cried out, ran to 



SYRUP OF GREEP 



53 



him, cradled his head; but it was too late. Life had hours 
ago departed from his form. 

My father scowled, cursed under his breath, hauled 
me away, saw the tears coursing down my cheeks, and 
slapped me, hard. I think he understood it all, in that 
moment, understood that Rudy and I had been more than 
friends, understood what Rudy had done with the 
creature of the wood. He was disgusted; he despised me, 
as I think he always had, an unforgiving man. But worse, 
the grove was ruined. Rudy’s blood would taint the soil, 
the greeps would be worthless if we grew them there. 
They would forever taste of metal, blood and death; they 
would win no praises at the tables of the city. 

He called the woodsmen to halt, and hauled me 
roughly away from Rudy’s form. He swore to kill me if I 
let the townsfolk know of my — unnatural desires, he 
called them; odd how natural they seemed, by 
comparison with Rudy’s, and he told me he would 
banish me from my home. I hardly cared. 

Rudy had known what his blood would do; though 
there were wheat fields, apiaries, and vineyards in 
Hamster-Dzorzia, the lifeblood of its commerce 
depended on the greep, and we had known its ways from 
infancy. He had slain himself, not out of despair, but out 
of love; not in mourning for the loss of his dryad, but to 
protect her from the axe. He had cheated me of my 



vengeance. And most of all, he made me realize that I, 
too, had never been more than a passing fancy, for him, 
little more than just another of his girls; would he ever 
have sacrificed his life for mine, as he did for the spirit 
of the oak? 

Had she planned this from the start? Had she known 
that, in this region, it was merely a matter of time before 
she, as had happened to all her dryad, sisters, would also 
fall to the axe? Had she plotted all this as a means of 
mere survival — betrayed Rudy as fully as I? 

From high in the oak’s stately branches, I caught a 
hint of a laughing face, a sardonic glint of the eye; the 
dryad looked down, mocking me. 

—GREG COSTIKYAN 




Proofreading / Copy editing 

P.O. Box 1 181 * Penn Ualley, CA 95946 
f916J 273-7757 



'The young warrior journeyed up the mountain and was initiated into the Great Mysteries..." 







MOW, rf/tO 



cctm ccmmo 









THE RADIANCE TECHNIQUE 






An ancient science of universal energy for your needs today - 
and for the rest of your life. 

A simple, proven, practical tool to unlock and fulfill your true potential 
for creativity - vitality - and radiant health on all levels. 



For information, call or write: 

Radiance Light and Power Co. 

(310) 285-3817 P.O. Box 17695, Beverly Hills, CA 90209 



54 



GALAXY 




THAT’S PROGRESS 

By LYN NICHOLS 

Illustrated by Elston 
ii /+ ey, Mikal!” 

•4 The shout was a welcomed interruption. I 

id J dropped another fist-sized stone into my bag 
and turned toward the voice. Ilmer — my 
best friend — waved from the road. He was driving a 
pony-drawn cart. 1 dragged my rock-filled bag toward 
him. Dust rose with every step and hung in the still, hot 
air. 

“Hi Ilmer. Little late for bread delivery, isn’t it?” I 
said, dropping the heavy bag with a sigh. Ilmer was the 
baker’s apprentice. I stretched tired muscles and felt the 
tingle of sunburned skin on my shoulders. 

“It’s not bread,” Ilmer answered. “Ever since my 
master bought one of those speaking-stone inventions 
from your master, I’ve been doing three and four 
deliveries a day! That thing has made my life 
miserable!” 

“Why?” I asked. “The Talkie-Rocks are supposed to 
make things easier.” I am, of course, the Wizard’s 
apprentice. “No more running messages all over the 

city.” 

“Yeah. But delivery requests are coming in at all 
hours, now.” He sighed and wiped sweat from his brow. 
“Before Master got that chatter-rock, I just delivered 
bread in the mornings. Now, it’s ‘Lord So-and-So needs 
this,’ or, ‘Lady Such-and-Brother wants that.’ And, of 
course, it’s all in a hurry. 



“And then, Master got this idea to add a new 
product. He calls it ‘quick-food.’” Ilmer indicated the 
back of the cart, and I saw a strange wooden box with 
little doors. Steam rose from the cracks and shimmered 
in the hot, summer air. 

“What’s that?” I asked. 

“It’s to keep the quick-food orders warm while I 
deliver them.” He looked up the hill toward the manors 
and mansions of the City Lords. “At least those blasted 
rockie-talks are so big and expensive that only the rich 
can afford them.” He sighed and shook the reins. “I’ve 
got to go. Master will skin me if I don’t meet the 
promised delivery times. Bye.” 

“See you later,” I said. He clucked to the pony and 
they started up the hill. 

I watched as the cart moved up the road. 1 didn’t tell 
Ilmer that my master had discovered a way to empower 
smaller stones, or that the smaller Talkie-Rocks would 
be less expensive. My master had a dream that soon 
everyone in the city would have a Talkie-Rock. 
‘Progress,’ he called it. Ilmer turned and waved. 

I waved back, then hefted my bag of fist-sized stones 

— wincing as the canvas rubbed my sunburned shoulder 

— and started the long walk back to my master’s house. 
As I walked, I had to laugh. Ilmer thought he was busy 
now? He’s going to miss these days of three and four 
deliveries when word of my master’s new invention gets 
out. He can’t read, of course, so he probably doesn’t 
know that the new sign tacked to the back of the baker’s 
cart says: “Kingdom Pizza, We Deliver.” 

—LYN NICHOLS 





THE DIFFERENCE A DAY MAKES 



55 




THE DIFFERENCE A 
DAY MAKES 

By GREGORY FITZ GERALD 

Illustrated by Tom X 

y late afternoon the stock market closed. Not 
waiting for the west coast exchange, stock broker 
Shane Conlan lifted his suit jacket from the chair 
back and pulled it on over his vest. He wore a pin-striped 
blue suit, white shirt, muted blue tie, and Bostonian 
black shoes, shined that morning to mirror reflection, but 
now scuffed. Lithe and twenty-four, clean shaven and 
short haired, Shane Conlan straightened his back to 
achieve his full 5 ’ 1 1”, pushed his chest out, sucked in his 
stomach in one final effort at the close of another hard 
day. 

The tote board had ceased its incessant clicking, the 
European exchanges had long been closed, so he put on 
his black Homburg hat, tossed his Wall Street Journal 
into the waste basket, and walked past the cashier’s cage, 
waving good night to the cashiers. Shane Conlan walked 
jauntily out through the lobby to the elevators. 

As soon as he’d left the building, his whole body 
slumped. 

The subway proved so crowded that Shane stood up 
all the way to Charles Street, where the woman seated 



just in front of him got up and stepped off, allowing him 
to slump down exhaustedly into the vacant seat. He 
looked around at the normal going-home crowd: the tired 
faces, the service men just mustered out, the few women 
in high heels hanging on straps, men studiously ignoring 
them, unwilling to surrender seats. 

Shane’s head lolled forward, chin on chest, thinking 
about the rising cost of automobiles. Fords priced as high 
as $1,500, and still not widely available at that inflated 
price. He dozed, nodded, then gradually fell asleep. 

In his sleep Shane felt the train lurch to a halt at 
Harvard Square, line’s end, and awoke. At first 
everything whirled about in an awakening daze, then his 
green eyes began to focus, noticing everything seemed 
different. The car itself seemed altered, somehow newer, 
and he marked a different ethnic mix than before: 
Negroes, Asians, Mexicans in their odd-looking clothes, 
their strange modes of gesturing and even walking. 

Shane wondered, shook his head to clear it, and stood 
up to experience a sharp pain in his right knee. He reached 
down to run it and noticed his hands — now gnarled, 
thin-skinned, blotched with brown spots and raised, bluish 
veins. His gaze, he noticed, didn’t seem too clear — but 
remained faintly clouded, even after rubbing his eyes. 
Absorbed in considering these facts, he reached the top of 
the stairs where, as custom dictated, he bought the evening 
Globe. Glancing at the headline (“MID-EAST PEACE 
PACT’), the completely different make-up appearance of 
the newspaper startled him. Then he saw the date: 




56 



GALAXY 



November 15, 1993. In a state of shock he crossed the 
street crowded with futuristic vehicles not at all like those 
he’d seen at the New York World’s Fair. As if in a dream 
and in the dark, he entered Harvard Yard wondering: My 
God, what has happened? 

In the Yard everything seemed familiar again. The 
beating of his heart, accelerating at observing the mod 
cars and wrinkled hands (now tucked safely into his 
pockets), had calmed. The knee pain gradually lessened as 
he walked through the dark yard. 

Strange, he’d not noticed the construction project on 
his way to work this morning. The tall, unlighted concrete 
building appeared to be nearing completion. He sighed as 
he neared his house on Ware Street, feeling for the key, 
tugging it out of his pocket just before mounting the steps. 

He tried to insert the key in the lock but couldn’t. 
How odd, he thought, the key won’t fit. He leaned down to 
look more closely in the weak light and saw the lock had 
been changed to a newer, shinier one. His key wouldn’t 
work. 

A momentary pang: could he have come to the wrong 
house in the darkness? They all looked alike, he 
remembered. The street contained more than a dozen red 
brick row houses built in the 1890’s; so he stepped 
backward to examine the facade again. The number — 
yes, the number twenty-four — exactly the same. What 
could be wrong? 

Fighting acceptance of change, Shane decided his wife 
must have changed the lock. He rang the bell, heard its 
different tone echo inside. Then after a long wait, he heard 
footsteps before the door opened. A woman of fifty or so, 
gray haired, ample-bosomed, with rosy cheeks, opened the 
door a few inches. 

“Yes?” she peered warily out from behind the chain. 

Shane, astonished, wondered what had happened to 
his wife, “Who . who are you?” 

“I’m Mrs. Freyer. Who are you looking for?” 

Shane hardly knew what to answer, “My wife and 
children. I . I . live here.” 

The woman stared wide-eyed, alarm clouding her 
face, “You must have the wrong house! We’ve lived here 
for twenty years.” She slammed the door, rammed home 
the bolt. 

Shane Conlan stepped back on the entry landing and 
stared up at the house front again. The same number: 
twenty-four — he knew that was right. He recognized the 
peculiar tilt to the roof gable, and the street seemed not 
unfamiliar. He shuffled down the stairs onto the cracked 
sidewalk again, looking back and forth, up and down the 
once-familiar street. Then he focused on changes. The 
building farther up the street appeared different. The 
patch of greensward in front of the next door neighbor’s 
house had been paved over, the hedge around another 
neighbor’s tiny lawn on the other side had vanished, the 
sidewalk had been repaved. None of the changes seemed 
recent enough to have been done today, yesterday, or even 
last week. 

Shane trudged a few paces up the street, noticing 



something different here, an alteration there — realizing at 
last how drastic had been the changes since he’d been at 
the office. 

At last the truth came home: he’d lost those 
intervening years, and as the sky thickened toward dusk, 
he finally understood his complete aloneness, totally 
disoriented in an alien world. Studying the shriveled skin 
of his hands, Shane realized what had happened. He could 
no longer call this his home, someone else lived here now. 
All he could think of: where were his young wife and 
children? How would he begin to find them? Finally, 
where would he sleep tonight? Tomorrow would he find 
his office still where it had been? 

After a few moments of painful hesitation Shane, not 
knowing what else to do, walked away toward the 
Common and the two hotels still flanking it. He crossed 
the Common amongst gum and candy wrappers, crumpled 
newspapers, used condoms, abandoned dirty underwear, 
and an occasional soleless shoe. He approached the 
Commander Hotel, entered the lobby, and enquired about 
a room for the night. The desk man quoted him a price in 
excess of one hundred dollars. Shane opened his wallet to 
a mere thirty dollars — what had seemed more than 
enough that morning. Without credit cards or other means 
of charging the exorbitant cost of a room, Shane left the 
hotel lobby and returned to the common. Slumping onto a 
vacant park bench, Shane pulled his overcoat tightly about 
him. The wind scraped old newspaper pages along the 
broken concrete sidewalk. Vagrants, bums, and the 
homeless began to infiltrate the darkened park. A bag lady 
sat down on the bench three feet distant, mumbled a tired 
greeting. 

‘You sleeping here tonight? This here’s my sleeping 
bench.” She began wrapping herself in old newspapers. 
“The one over there ain’t taken yet.” From a ragged sleeve 
pointed a dirty finger. 

Shane stifled a sob and shuffled over to the other 
bench, where he lay himself down to sleep in his clothes. 

—GREGORY FITZ GERALD 



BAINS FINE ARTS UNLIMITED 

INTERGALACTIC ART DEALER 

FOR ART THAT’S OUT OF THIS WORLD 

Representing Menlo Macfarlane, R.C. Trice, Tom X., 
Della Heywood, E.J. Gold, Kelly Rivera, et al. 

EARTH PHONE (Vancouver, B.C. Canada): 

( 604 ) 327-3071 



MUTANT 



57 




MUTANT 



By MARSH CASSADY 

Illustrated by S. Gold 

he car began to grumble and dip, and Pierre felt 
II a jolt of fear. He was passing the jungle, a green 

tangle of choking vines and undergrowth, the 
place where grotesque mutants lived. 

Pierre hated the drive home alone at night, and to 
make matters worse, the full moon showed pale yellow 
beyond smoky clouds. This was the worst of times, a 
night of insanity when sleeping beasts began to stir, 
when hideous beings rose to stalk the night. Or so the 
legends said. 

War had nearly decimated the earth; Pierre’s 
grandfather talked about how lucky a small minority was 
to escape, at least till the mutations became apparent. 
The worst fled to the jungles of Balboa park, once a zoo 
and cultural center for the city of Diego. Yet everyone to 
a degree had abnormalities. 

The car coughed and slowed, nearly crashing 
through its cushion of air. Damn mechanics anyway. 
They’d assured him the car was fine, just a matter of 
adjusting the timing. 

He’d always tried to be careful. As a police 
inspector, he knew the dangers that could befall a lonely 
traveler. Strangely enough, he’d never seen the creatures 
that inflicted the torturous deaths on those who ventured 



too close to the jungle. Even though there seemed to be 
an unvoiced agreement about each group keeping to its 
territory, citizens sometimes strayed. Usually, it was 
teenagers out to prove their bravery. 

Pierre had seen throats ripped open by fangs or 
bodies cut in small pieces, most of the parts dragged off. 
He gripped the steering wheel. Only a mile or so till the 
worst was over, till he was away from danger. 
Headlights illuminated the path before him, a road now 
cracked and nearly overgrown. If only he hadn’t decided 
to take the short cut. But he’d been delayed and had 
promised this time that he’d be home to see his twin 
sons’ vid soccer game, played against a school up north 
in City of Angels. 

He began to sweat. He glanced right, toward the 
jungle only yards away, creeping ever closer to the road 
that no one would dare fix for fear of attack. 

A clanging began, and the car spit fitfully. Pierre’s 
fingers formed bands around the steering wheel. His jaw 
ached with tension. He started to rock back and forth, as 
if the motion would somehow propel the car forward. 
With one last gasp, the motor died. 

Milt Johnson opened his eyes and stretched. He 
sighed deeply and sat up. Now the change would begin, 
the change to power. Feelings of strength flowed through 
his body. He held his hands out and saw them sprout 
coarse hair. The fingernails narrowed, hardened into 
claws. Pads formed on his palms and fingers. 

As blood surged within him, he ran from the 
sleeping cave, tore off his clothes and sniffed the 
powerful odors around him — must and decay, mixed 
with animal smells. It was good to be alive. He threw 
back his head and howled at the moon. 

The worst had happened, and Pierre had to accept it. 
The decision made, his breath came easier. He glanced 
around to see if there was anything important he should 
take with him. There wasn’t really. He loosened his seat 
belt and climbed out. No one would ever risk coming 
back for the car. He’d simply abandon it. 

He hadn’t been in this particular area of town for a 
couple of years, and things had deteriorated. No one 
knew how to keep the jungle contained. He shrugged. He 
wouldn’t have to travel far on foot, and he was in good 
shape. He ran or biked each day, swam a couple of times 
a week. He slammed the door shut. Maybe he’d be lucky 
and make it. 

Milt lived for the nights of the full moon. In his 
alternate state, huddled with the others in hollowed-out 
caves, he hoarded his strength for times such as this. 

Pierre trotted along the asphalt, keeping up a steady 
pace. Thirty-four years old, he’d worked hard to 
overcome his handicap and gain his appointment as the 
youngest police inspector on the Diego force. Everyone 
was differently able now, and many simply succumbed 





58 



GALAXY 



to failure. But not Pierre; from the time he was a child, 
he aimed at the police force, determined to let nothing 
stop him in achieving his goal. 

He glanced toward the jungle, wondering what 
horrors lurked within. Intellectually, he could feel sorry 
for the beings who lived there. As the histories told, his 
people and the jungle inhabitants had sprung from a 
single common ancestry. 

Pierre denied the aching of his joints, the pain caused 
by each additional step. In no more than two or three 
minutes, he knew, he’d be past the jungle. He’d make it, 
maybe not in time for his sons’ soccer game. But there’d 
be other games. He listened to the plod of his feet. 

Milt had never known another kind of life. Folktales 
had it that beyond the jungle only “normals” lived. He 
knew they weren’t completely normal, but not so altered 
as he and his kind. Yet Milt enjoyed the diversity among 
his family and friends. By unspoken agreement, they 
never preyed upon one another, but upon descendants of 
the zoo animals. The ultimate satisfaction came in 
stalking and killing the occasional outsider who’d 
ventured too far from safety. 

The only differences among those outsiders, Milt 
believed, was their size. Among Milt’s kith and kin, 
there was more uniformity, which, despite the 
diversities, prevented bullying. 

All these thoughts and more went through Milt’s 
head as he raced toward the road at the edge of the 
jungle. 

Pierre began to tire. Still, with each lagging step, a 
shot of adrenalin pumped through his system, spurring 
him forward. Up ahead he could see the lights of Diego, 
kind and protective. No jungle creatures ever ventured 
there. It was theorized that they feared all light except 
the sun’s reflection on the moon. 

Throat parched, sweat soaking his clothing, breath 
coming in heaves, Pierre shucked off his suit coat and let 
it fall behind him. 

Milt paused and sniffed. The scent was stronger 
now. The hackles rose on his neck, and he growled deep 
in his throat. He cocked his head to listen. Someone was 
running, coming closer and closer. 

The lust for blood was all-consuming. He’d eaten 
nuts and roots in his other form. It had been a month 
since he’d tasted blood. He could imagine his fangs 
ripping and tearing, and the liquid fire spraying his 
muzzle and face. He’d bury his nose in warm flesh and 
gorge until he was filled. Then once he changed back, 
he’d hack the body to pieces with sharpened stones and 
drag it back to the cave for the others to finish. 

If he waited in the thicket at the near edge of the 
road, the normal wouldn’t see him. He’d be 
concentrating on escape, on getting back to his family. 
Milt felt a wrench of sadness. He had a family too. But 
there was no comparison. If he didn’t kill the normal, his 



own family could easily die of starvation. 

The closer the footsteps came, the faster Milt’s heart 
pounded till he felt his arteries would burst. He felt a 
stab of excitement. The normal had come into sight. Milt 
and his family would feast. He gauged the time and 
leaped. 

Pierre stumbled but kept on running, despite the 
needles of pain in his ankle. Something was wrong, he 
kept slipping. When he finally reached the lights of town 
and knew he was safe, he pulled off his shoe, a gigantic 
oxford as befitted his fourteen-foot body. On the bottom, 
squashed against the huge sole, was an animal of some 
kind. Pierre shook his head in puzzlement. It looked 
almost like a tiny dog. 

—MARSH CASSADY 




EAU D'FUNERAL HOME 

The bardo stinks. Well, maybe not exactly 
stinks but it certainly smells. There are 
such things as odors that evoke the bardo, 
that either put you there or indicate that you 
already are there. Eau d'Funeral Home — 
it'll put you over the line.... 
Essential Oil, 2.2 dram bottle, $25 
CALL 1-800-869-0658 TO ORDER 



SILKY, SLINKY, FABULOUS — TO DIE FOR 



59 




SILKY, SLINKY, 
FABULOUS — 

TO DIE FOR 

By MARK McLAUGHLIN 

Illustrated by Heywood 

awny Nicole, creamy Damon, cafe au lait 
Giselle-, all three had lovely skin and wild, 
golden hair. All three wore fabulous new outfits 
of shot-silk, and all three were gazing upon Theophile 
Comte with sparkling green eyes. 

“You are a genius, Theo darling,” Nicole said, 
stroking the sleeve of her bolero jacket. “A mad genius. 
The Oscar Wilde of fashion.” 

“Oh, please.'’’ Damon sighed with exasperation and 
rolled his eyes. “He is a modern-day Baude/a;>e.” He 
patted his scarf into place and sighed again, this time 
with contentment. 

Giselle laughed her tiny, tinkling, descending-tones 
laugh. “Try Aleister Crowley.” A golden bell on her 
ankle bracelet jangled as she walked to the full-length 
mirror next to Theophile’s work table. Ordinarily, harem 
pants did nothing for her . These, however, were 
marvelous. Absolutely to die for. 

Theophile grinned hugely. Moonlight streamed 
through the skylight of his loft apartment, illuminating 



his bald pate. “You look lovely, my dear ones. 
Absolutely lovely.” He handed each of the models a 
petite black cup. “Now let us see how my pretty rags 
work." 

The three drank the amber liqueur within the cups. 
Nicole purred as her jacket merged with her flesh. Wavy 
golden fur cascaded from her arms, her back. “Haute 
coutere from Hell,” she whispered. “You have outdone 
yourself, Theo.” 

Damon licked his lips. “Delicious. A touch of mint.” 
He set down his cup and flexed his long, curved claws. 

“Yes, there is mint in the brew,” Theophile said. He 
adjusted his turtleneck to hide his double chin. “And 
catnip and valerian and satyr’s blood.” 

Giselle dropped to all fours. She noticed an errant 
curl on her right flank and licked it into place. “However 
will you change us back?” 

The bald man raised an iron-gray eyebrow. “Change 
you back? Surely not! This is my greatest triumph, my 
dear ones. You shall stay this way forever . and in a 
moment, I shall join you. But I must confess: you were 
my guinea pigs, after a fashion.” 

Nicole looked to Damon, who in turn looked to 
Giselle. 

“Speaking of fashion,” Theophile continued, “I 
certainly like what I see. The season definitely calls for 
fur. Excuse me while I slip into my own silk suit.” He 
moved toward a large, flat box lying beside the 
full-length mirror. 

Giselle jumped on top of the box; the gold bell 







60 



GALAXY 



jangled one last time as the ankle bracelet fell from her 
back paw. She began to growl at the bald man. Damon 
and Nicole drew closer, claws tapping on the hardwood 
floor. 

“My dear ones!” Theophile bit his thick lower lip. “I 
gather that the three of you are upset . Because you 
can no longer model? Is that it?” 

“Of course not.” Damon sighed deeply and rolled his 
slit-pupiled eyes. “Don’t you see? We can’t let you have 
that suit. We simply can’t. This sort of look requires — 
Panache. Style. Flair.” 

“Too true,” Nicole murmured. She tickled 
Theophile’s potbelly with the tip of a claw, drawing 
blood. Rich, fatty blood. 

Giselle’s laugh now sounded more like a hiss. “You 



may be the designer, old man,” she said, “but the catwalk 
is ours.” 

Theophile opened his mouth to protest. And at that 
moment, his dear ones pounced. 

—mark McLaughlin 



ATTENTIACIZER 

This is basically the same device that we have made available to a 
select few for the past seven years. Please note that in many cases 
we have a three to six month waiting period for deliveiy. This is 
truly a must for the serious voyager. But since we already have a 
backlog of orders by word-of-mouth advertising there is no point in 
talking up the product. 

BLACK BOX WITH 
SPECIAL CLOCKWORKS. $100.00 
CALL 1-800-869-0658 TO ORDER OR FOR 
MORE INFORMATION 



G&L&xy • torie * 



si i I sit » lo on IsifM* !!! 



Galaxy 





Catherine Oxenberg, Director 
Photo: E.J. Gold 



In production, "The Proper Thing to Do" by 
Brad Linaweaver, "The Source of Inspiration" 
by Michael Decker, "Seven Soup Rivers" by 
Robert Sheckley, "Avatar" by Janet Berliner, 
"The Forgotten Ones” by Lyn Nichols, 
"Reality Clay" by John Rosenman, "Ms ... 
Found ...” by Mary Sass, "Sacrifice" by L.S. 
Silverthorne, "Dances with Elves" and "Iced" 
by Cynthia Ward, "Yule" by K.D. Wentworth, 
"Nuts and Bolts" by Greg Vose, "Mahoghany 
Dream" by David Bollinger, "Ghost Maker" by 
Frederik Pohl, and more 



Informal readings by selected individuals including GAP Director, 
actress/writer Catherine Oxenberg and actor/writer James P. Healy. 
Science fiction, fantasy and horror stories. Recorded, digitally mastered 
and produced in the Galaxy hi-tech, multitrack recording studio. Best 
audiophile quality real time dubs. $15.00 each. Galaxy subscribers pay 
$10.00 each. 



GAP tape 001 

Wells of Wisdom 

Brad Linaweaver 

GAP tape 002 

Dragon Lady 

Evelyn E. Smith 

TheWordsThe Names 

Don Webb 

GAP tape 003 
Three Wish Habit 

Janni Lee Simner 

The Biography Project 
H.L. Gold 
NothingChanges 

Chuck Rothman 



The Vilbar Party 

Evelyn E. Smith 

The Fornicators 

B. Johnson- Haddad 

GAP tape 004 

Not Fit for Children 
Evelyn E. Smith 
Extraction 

Jeffry Dwight 

Perchance to Scream 

Janet Berliner 

GAP tape 005 

Mr. Monster Waits in 
Heaven for an Angel 

Forry Ackerman 



Ants in her Attic 

Kent Brewster 

GAP tape 006 

In the Canal Zone 

Jean Marie Stine 

The Big Chill 

Cynthia Ward 

The Copper Ring 

Robert Houdin 

Graveyard at the 
Grand 

Janet Berliner 

GAP tape 007 

More Stately 
Mansions 

John Rosenman 



To order, call f -800-869-0658 



OVERSEAS 1-916/432-1839 






■>«3ss to I»ocomc aa. classic in 
every science fiction lil>rary 



GALAXY SUBSCRIBER SPECIAL: Get a GALAXY mug and GALAXY AUDIO PROJECT tape for $16.95 



MAN IN THE MAILBAG 



61 




MAN IN THE 
MAILBAG 

By GORDON R. DICKSON 

Illustrated by Doran 

he Right Honorable Joshua Guy, Ambassador 
II Plenipotentiary to Dilbia, was smoking tobacco 
in a pipe. The fumes from it made John Tardy 
cough and strangle — or, at least, so it seemed. 

“Sir?” wheezed John Tardy. 

“Sorry,” said Joshua, knocking the pipe out in an 
ashtray where the coals continued to smolder only 
slightly less villainously than before. “Thought you 
heard me the first time. I said that naturally as soon as 
we knew you were being assigned to the job, we let out 
word that you were deeply attached to the girl.” 

“To — ” John gulped air. Both men were talking 
Dilbian, to exercise the command of the language John 
had had hypnoed into him on his way here from the Belt 
Stars, and the Dilbian nickname for the missing Earthian 
female sociologist came from his lips automatically — 
“this Greasy Face?” 

“Miss Ty Lamorc,” nodded Joshua, smoothly 
slipping into Basic and then out again. “Greasy Face, if 
you prefer. By the by, you mustn’t go taking all these 
Dilbian names at face value. The two old gentlemen 
you’re going to meet — Daddy Shaking Knees and Two 
Answers — aren’t what they might sound like. Daddy 
Shaking Knees got his name from holding up one end of 



a timber one day in an emergency — after about 
forty-five minutes, someone noticed his knees beginning 
to tremble. And Two Answers is a tribute to the Dilbian 
who can come up with more than one answer to a 
problem.” 

About to ask Joshua about his own Dilbian nickname 
of Little Bite, John Tardy shifted to safer ground. “What 
about this Schlaff fellow who — ” 

“Heiner Schlaff,” interrupted Joshua Guy, frowning, 
“made a mistake. You’d think anyone would know better 
than to lose his head when a Dilbian picks him up. After 
the first time one picked up Heinie, he wasn’t able to 
step out onto the street without some Dilbian lifting him 
up to hear him yell for help. The Squeaking Squirt, they 
called him — very bad for Earth-Dilbian relations.” He 
looked severely at John. “I don’t expect anything like 
that from you.” The ambassador’s eye seemed to weigh 
John’s chunky body and red hair. 

“No, no,” said John hastily. 

“Decathalon winner in the Olympics four years back, 
weren’t you? 

“Yes,” said John. “But what I really want is to get on 
an Exploration team to one of the new planets. I’m a 
fully qualified biochemist and — ” 

“I read your file. Well,” Joshua Guy said, “do a good 
job here and who knows?” He glanced out the window 
beside him at the sprawling log buildings of the local 
Dilbian town of Humrog, framed against the native 
conifers and the mountain peaks beyond. “But it’s your 
physical condition that’ll count. You understand why you 
have to go it alone, don’t you?” 




62 



GALAXY 



“They told me back on Earth. But if you can add 
anything — ” 

“Headquarters never understands the fine points of 
these situation^” said Joshua, almost cheerfully. “To put 
it tersely — we want to make friends with these 
Dilbians. They’re the race nearest to ours in intelligence 
that we’ve run across so far. They’d make fine partners. 
Unfortunately we don’t seem to be able to impress them 
very much.” 

“Size?” asked John Tardy. 

“Well, yes — size is probably the biggest stumbling 
block. The fact that we’re about lap-dog proportions in 
relation to them. But it shows up even more sharply in a 
cultural dissimilarity. They don’t give a hang for our 
mechanical gimmicks and they’re all for personal honor 
and a healthy outdoors life.” He looked at John. “You’ll 
say, of course, why not a show of force?” 

“I should think — ” began John. 

“But we don’t want to fight them — we want to 
make friends with them. Let me give you an Earth-type 
analogy. For centuries, humans have been able to more 
or less tame most of the smaller wild animals. The large 
ones, however, being unused to knuckling under to 
anyone — ” 

Beep! signaled the annunciator on Joshua’s desk. 

“Ah, they’re here now.” Joshua Guy rose. “We’ll go 
into the reception room. Now remember that 
Boy-Is-She-Built is old Shaking Knees’ daughter. It was 
the fact that the Streamside Terror wanted her that 
caused all this ruckus and ended up with the Terror’s 
kidnapping Ty Lamorc.” 

He led the way through the door into the next room. 
John Tardy followed, his head, in spite of the hypno 
training, still spinning a little with the odd Dilbian names 
— in particular Boy-Is-She-Built, the Basic translation 
of which was only a pale shadow of its Dilbian original. 
While not by any means a shy person, John rather 
hesitated to look a father in the eye and refer to the 
female child of his old age as — further reflections were 
cut short as he entered the room. 

“Ah, there. Little Bite!” boomed the larger of the two 
black-furred monsters awaiting them. The one who 
spoke stood well over two and a half meters in height — 
at least eight feet tall. “This the new one? Two Answers 
and I came right over to meet him. Kind of 
bright-colored on top, isn’t he?” 

John Tardy blinked. But Joshua Guy answered 
equably enough. 

“Some of us have that color hair back home,” he 
said. “This is John Tardy — John, meet Shaking Knees. 
And the quiet one is Two Answers.” 

“ Quiet /” roared the other Dilbian, bursting into 
gargantuan roars of laughter. “Me quiet! That’s good!” 
He bellowed his merriment. 

John stared. In spite of the hypno training, he could 
not help comparing these two to a couple of very large 
bears who had stood up on their hind legs and gone on a 



diet. They were leaner than bears — though leanness is 
relative when you weigh upward of a thousand pounds 
— and longer-legged. Their noses were more pug, their 
lower jaws more humanlike than ursinoid in the way of 
chin. But their complete coat of thick black hair and their 
bearishness of language and actions made the 
comparison almost inevitable — though in fact their true 
biological resemblance was closer to the humans 
themselves. 

“Haven’t laughed like that since old Souse Nose fell 
in the beer vat!” snorted Two Answers, gradually getting 
himself under control. “All right, Bright Top, what’ve 
you got to say for yourself? Think you can take the 
Streamside Terror with one hand tied behind your back?” 

“I’m here,” said John Tardy, “to bring back — er — 
Greasy Face, and — ” 

“Streamside won’t just hand her over. Will he, 
Knees?” Two Answers jogged his companion with a 
massively humorous elbow. 

“Not that boy!” Shaking Knees shook his head. 
“Little Bite, I ought never have let you talk me out of a 
son-in-law like that. Tough? Rough? Tricky? My little 
girl’d do all right with a buck like that.” 

“I merely,” demurred Joshua, “suggested you make 
them wait a bit. Boy-Is-She-Built is still rather young — ” 

“And, boy, is she built!” said Shaking Knees in a 
tone of fond, fatherly pride. “Still, it’s hard to see how 
she could do much better.” He peered suddenly at 
Joshua. “You wouldn’t have something hidden between 
your paws on this?” 

Joshua Guy spread his hands in a wounded manner. 
“Would I risk one of my own people? Maybe two? All to 
start something that would make the Terror mad enough 
to steal Greasy to pay me back?” 

“Guess not,” admitted Shaking Knees. “But you 
Shorties are shrewd little characters.” His words rang 
with honest admiration. 

“Thanks. The same to you,” said Joshua. “Now 
about the Terror — ” 

“He headed west through the Cold Mountains,” 
replied Two Answers. “He was spotted yesterday a 
half-day’s hike north, pointed toward Sour Ford and the 
Hollows. He probably nighted at Brittle Rock Inn there.” 

“Good,” said Joshua. “We’ll have to find a guide for 
my friend here.” 

“Guide? Ho!” chortled Shaking Knees. Wait’ll you 
see what we got for you.” He shouldered past Two 
Answers, opened the door and bellowed, “Bluffer! Come 
on in!” 

There was a moment’s pause, and then a Dilbian 
even leaner and taller than Shaking Knees shoved his 
way into the room, which, with this new Dilbian 
addition, became decidedly crowded. 

“There you are,” said Shaking Knees, waving a 
prideful paw. “What more could you want? Walk all day, 
climb all night, and start out fresh next morning after 
breakfast. Little Bite, meet the Hill Bluffer!” 



MAN IN THE MAILBAG 



63 



“That’s me!” boomed the newcomer, rattling the 
walls. “Anything on two feet walk away from me? Not 
over solid ground or living rock! When I look at a hill, it 
knows it’s beat, and it lays out flat for my trampling 
feet!” 

“Very good,” said Joshua dryly. “But I don’t know 
about my friend here keeping up if you can travel like 
that.” 

“Keep up? Hah!” guffawed Shaking Knees. “No, no, 
Little Bite — don’t you recognize the Bluffer here? He’s 
the postman. We’re going to mail this half-pint friend of 
yours to the Terror. Only way. Cost you five kilos of 
nails.” 

“Nobody stops the mail,” put in the Hill Bluffer. 

“Hmm,” said Joshua. He glanced at John Tardy. 
“Not a bad suggestion. The only thing is how you plan to 
carry him — ” 

“Who? Him?” boomed the Bluffer, focusing on 
John. “Why, I’ll handle him like he was a week-old pup. 
I’ll wrap him in some real soft straw and tuck him in the 
bottom of my mailbag and — ” 

“Hold it,” interrupted Joshua. “That’s just what I was 
afraid of. If you’re going to carry him, you’ll have to do 
it humanely.” 

“I won’t wear it!” the Hill Bluffer was still roaring, 
two hours later. The cause of his upset, a system of 
straps and pads arranged into a rough saddlebag that 
would ride between his shoulders and bear John, lay on 
the crushed rock of Humrog’s main street. A few Dilbian 
bystanders had gathered to watch and their bass-voiced 
comments were not of the sort to bring the Hill Bluffer to 
a more reasonable frame of mind. 

“Listen, you tad!” Shaking Knees was beginning to 
get a little hot under the neck-fur himself. “This is your 
mother’s uncle’s first cousin speaking. You want me to 
speak to the great-grandfathers of your clan — ” 

“Arright — arright — arright!” snarled the Hill 
Bluffer. “Buckle me up in the obscenity thing!” 

“That’s better!” growled Shaking Knees, simmering 
down as John Tardy and Joshua Guy went to work to put 
the saddle on. “Not that 1 blame you, but — ” 

“Don’t feel so bad at that,” said the Hill Bluffer 
sulkily, wriggling his shoulders under the straps in 
experimental fashion. 

“You’ll find it,” grunted Joshua, tugging on a strap, 
“easier to carry than your regular bag.” 

“That’s not the point,” groused the Hill Bluffer. “A 
postman's got dignity. He just don’t wear — ” He 
exploded suddenly at a snickering onlooker. “What’s so 
funny, you? Want to make something out of it? Just say 
the — ” 

“I’ll take care of him!” roared Shaking Knees, 
rolling forward. “What’s wrong with you. Split Nose?” 

The Dilbian addressed as Split Nose swallowed his 
grin rather hastily as the Humrog village chief took a 
hand in the conversation. 

“Just passing by,” he growled defensively, backing 



out of the crowd. 

“Well, just pass on, friend, pass on!” boomed 
Shaking Knees. He was rewarded by a hearty laugh from 
the crowd, and Split Nose rolled off down the street with 
every indication his hairy ears were burning. 

John had taken advantage of this little by-play to 
mount into the saddlebag. The Hill Bluffer grunted in 
surprise and looked back at him. 

“You’re light enough,” he said. “How is it? All right 
back there?” 

“Feels fine,” said John, unsuspecting. 

“Then so long, everybody!” boomed the Hill Bluffer, 
and, without further warning, barreled off down the main 
street in the direction of the North Trail, the Cold 
Mountains and the elusive but dangerous Streamside 
Terror. 

Had it not been for the hypno training, John Tardy 
would not have been able to recognize this fast and 
unexpected start for the Dilbian trick it was. He realized 
instantly, however, that the Hill Bluffer, having lost his 
enthusiasm for the job at first sight of the harness which 
was to carry John, was attempting a little strategy to get 
out of it. Outright refusal to carry John was out of the 
question, but if John should object to the 
unceremoniousness of his departure, the Bluffer would 
be perfectly justified — by Dilbian standards — if he 
threw up his hands and refused to deliver a piece of mail 
that insisted on imposing conditions on him. John shut 
his mouth and hung on. 

All the same, it was awkward. John had intended to 
work out a plan of action with Joshua Guy before he left. 
Well, there was always the wrist-phone. He would call 
Joshua at the first convenient opportunity. 

Meanwhile, it was developing that the Hill Bluffer 
had not exaggerated his ability to cover ground. One 
moment they were on the main street of Humrog, and the 
next upon a mountain trail, green pinelike branches 
whipping by as John Tardy plunged and swayed to the 
Hill Bluffer’s motion like a man on the back of an 
elephant. It was no time for abstract thought. John clung 
to the straps before him, meditating rather bitterly on that 
natural talent of his for athletics which had got him into 
this, when by all rights he should be on an exploration 
team on one of the frontier planets right now. He was 
perfectly qualified, but just because of that decathalon 
win . 

He continued to nurse his grievances for something 
better than an hour, when he was suddenly interrupted by 
the Hill Bluffer’s grunting and slowing down. Peering 
forward over the postman’s shoulder, John discovered 
another Dilbian who had just stepped out of the woods 
before them. The newcomer was on the shaggy side. He 
carried an enormous triangular-headed axe and had some 
native herbivore roughly the size and shape of a musk-ox 
slung casually over one shoulder. 

“Hello, woodsman,” said the Hill Bluffer, halting. 

“Hello, postman.” The other displayed a gap-toothed 



64 



GALAXY 



array of fangs in a grin. “Got some mail for me?” 

“You!” the Hill Bluffer snorted. 

“Not so funny. I could get mail,” growled the other. 
He peered around at John. “So that’s the Half Pint 
Posted.” 

“Oh?” said the Hill Bluffer. “Who told you?” 

“The Cobbly Queen, that’s who!” retorted the other, 
curling the right side of his upper lip in the native 
equivalent of a wink. John Tardy, recalling the Cobblies 
were the Dilbian equivalent of fairies, brownies, or 
what-have-you, peered at the woodsman to see if he was 
serious. John decided he wasn’t. Which still left the 
problem of how he had recognized John. 

Remembering the best Dilbian manners were made 
of sheer brass, John Tardy horned in on the conversation. 

“Who’re you?” he demanded of the woodsman. 

“So it talks, does it?” The woodsman grinned. “They 
call me Tree Weeper, Half Pint. Because I chop them 
down, you see.” 

“Who told you about me?” 

“Oh, that’d be telling,” grinned Tree Weeper. “Say, 
you know why they call him the Streamside Terror, Half 
Pint? It’s on account of he likes to fight alongside a 
stream, pull the other feller in and drown him.” 

“I know,” said John shortly. 

“Do you now?” said the other. “Well, it ought to be 
something to watch. Good going to you, Half Pint, and 
you too, postman. Me for home.” 

He turned away into the brush alongside the trail and 
it swallowed him up. The Hill Bluffer took up his route 
again without a word. 

“Friend of yours?” inquired John, when it became 
apparent the Hill Bluffer was not going to comment on 
the meeting. 

“Friend?” the Hill Bluffer snorted angrily. “ I’m a 
public official!” 

“I just thought — ” said John. “He seemed to know 
things.” 

“That hill hopper! Somebody ahead of us told him!” 
growled the Bluffer. But he fell unaccountably silent 
after that and said no more for the next three hours, until 
— the two of them having left Humrog a couple of hours 
past noon — they pulled up in the waning sunlight 
before the roadside inn at Brittle Rock, where they would 
spend the night. 

The first thing John Tardy did, after working some 
life back into his legs, was to stroll off to the limits of the 
narrow, rocky ledge on which the Inn stood — Brittle 
Rock was hardly more than a wide spot in the narrow 
mountain gorge up which their road ran — and put in a 
call to Joshua Guy with the phone on his wrist. As soon 
as Joshua got on the beam, John relievedly explained the 
reason behind his call. It did not go over, apparently, 
very well. 

“Instructions?” floated the faintly astonished voice 
of the ambassador out of the receiver. “What 
instructions?” 



“The ones you were going to give me. Before I took 
off so suddenly — ” 

“But there’s absolutely nothing I can tell you,” 
interrupted Joshua. “You’ve had your hypno training. 
It’s up to you. Find the Terror and get the girl back. 
You’ll have to figure out your own means, my dear 
fellow.” 

“But — ■” John stopped, staring helpless at the phone. 

“Well, good luck, then. Call me tomorrow. Call me 
anytime.” 

“Thanks,” said John. 

“Not at all. Luck. Good-by.” 

“Good-by.” 

John Tardy clicked off the phone and walked 
somberly back to the Inn. Inside its big front door, he 
found a wide common room filled with tables and 
benches. The Hill Bluffer, to the amusement of a host of 
other travelers, was arguing with a female Dilbian 
wearing an apron. 

“How the unmentionable should I know what to feed 
him?” the Hill Bluffer was bellowing. “Give him some 
meat, some beer — anything!” 

“But you haven’t had the children dragging in pets 
like I have. Feed one the wrong thing and it dies. And 
then they cry their little hearts — ” 

“Talking about me?” John Tardy broke in. 

“Oh!” gasped the female, glancing down and 
retreating half a step. “It talks!” 

“Didn’t I say he did?” demanded the Bluffer. “Half 
Pint, what kind of stuff do you eat?” 

John fingered the four- inch tubes of food concentrate 
at his waist. Dilbian food would not poison him, though 
he could expect little nourishment from it, and a fair 
chance of an allergic reaction from certain fruits and 
vegetables. Bulk was all he needed to supplement the 
concentrates. 

“Just give me a little beer,” he said. 

The room buzzed approval. This little critter, they 
seemed to feel, could not be too alien if he liked to drink. 
The female brought him a wastebasket-sized wooden 
mug that had no handles and smelled like the most 
decayed of back-lot breweries. John took a cautious sip 
and held the bitter, sour, flat-tasting liquid in his mouth 
for an indecisive moment. 

He swallowed manfully. The assembled company 
gave vent to rough-voiced approval, then abruptly turned 
their attention elsewhere. Looking around, he saw that 
the Hill Bluffer had gone off somewhere. John climbed 
up on a nearby bench and got to work on his food 
concentrates. 

After finishing these, he continued to sit where he 
was for the better part of an hour, but the Hill Bluffer did 
not return. Struck by a sudden thought, John Tardy 
climbed down and went back toward the kitchen of the 
Inn. Pushing his way through a hide curtain, he found 
himself in it — a long room with a stone fire-trough 
down the center, carcasses hanging from overhead 



MAN IN THE MAILBAG 



65 



beams, and a dozen or so Dilbians of both sexes equally 
immersed in argument and the preparation of food and 
drink. Among them was the female who had brought 
John the beer. 

He stepped into her path as she headed for the front 
room with a double handful of full mugs. 

“Eeeeek!” she exclaimed, or the Dilbian equivalent, 
stopping so hastily she spilled some of the beer. “There’s 
a good little Shorty,” she said in a quavering, coaxing 
tone. “Good Shorty. Go back now.” 

“Was the Terror really here last night?” John asked. 

“He stopped to pick up some meat and beer, but I 
didn’t see him,” she said. “I’ve no time for hill-and-alley 
brawlers. Now shoo!” 

John Tardy shooed. 

As he was heading back to his bench, however, he 
felt himself scooped up from behind. Looking back over 
his shoulder, he saw he was being carried by a large male 
Dilbian with a pouch hanging from one shoulder. This 
individual carried him to a table where three other 
Dilbians sat and dropped him on it. John Tardy 
instinctively got to his feet. 

“There he be,” said the one who had picked him up. 
“A genuine Shorty.” 

“Give him some beer,” suggested one with a scar on 
his face, who was seated at the table. 

They did. John prudently drank some. 

“Don’t hold much,” commented one of the others at 
the table, examining the mug John had set down after 
what had been actually a very healthy draft for a human. 
“I wonder if he — ” 

“Couldn’t. Not at that size,” replied the one with the 
pouch. “He’s chasing that female Shorty, though. You 
reckon — ” 

Scarface regretted that they did not have the Shorty 
female there at the moment. Her presence, in his opinion, 
would have provided the opportunity for interesting and 
educative experimentation. 

“Go to hell!” said John in Basic. He then made the 
most forceful translation he could manage in Dilbian. 

“Tough character!” said the pouched one, and they 
all laughed. “Better not get tough with me, though.” 

He made a few humorous swipes at John’s red head 
that would have split it on contact. They laughed again. 

“I wonder,” said Scarface, “can he do tricks?” 

“Sure,” John answered promptly. He hefted his 
still-full mug of beer. “Watch. I take a firm grip, rock 
back, and — ” He spun suddenly on one heel, sloshing a 
wave of beer into their staring faces. Then he was off the 
table and dodging among Dilbian and table legs toward 
the front entrance. The rest of the guests, roaring with 
laughter, made no attempt to halt him. He ducked into 
the outer darkness. 

Fumbling in the gloom, he made his way around the 
side of the Inn and dropped down on a broken keg he 
found there. He was just making up his mind to stay 
there until the Hill Bluffer came and found him, when 



the back kitchen door opened and closed very softly, off 
to his left. 

He slipped off the keg into deeper shadow. He had 
caught just a glimpse out of the corner of his eye, but he 
had received the impression of a Dilbian female in the 
doorway. There was no sound now. 

He began to creep backward. Dilbian’s one moon 
was not showing over these latitudes at this season of the 
year, and the starlight gave only a faint illumination. He 
stumbled suddenly over the edge of an unseen slope and 
froze, remembering the cliff edge overhanging the gorge 
below. 

A faint reek of the Dilbian odor came to his nostrils 
— and a sound of sniffing. Dilbians were no better than 
humans when it came to a sense of smell, but each had a 
perceptible odor to the nostrils of the other — an odor 
partly dependent on diet, partly on a differing 
physiological makeup. The odor John Tardy smelled was 
part-piny, part-musk. 

The sniffing ceased. John held his breath, waiting for 
it to start again. The pressure built up in his chest, and 
finally he was forced to exhale. He turned his head 
slowly from side to side. 

Silence. 

Only the inner creak of his tense neck muscles 
turning. There! Was that something? John began to creep 
back along the edge beside him. 

There was a sudden rush, a rearing up of some huge 
dark shape in the darkness before him. He dodged, felt 
himself slipping on the edge, and something smashed 
like a falling wall against the side of his head, and he 
went whirling down and away into star-shot darkness. 

He opened his eyes to bright sunlight. 

The sun, just above the mountain peaks, was shining 
right in his eyes. He blinked and started to roll over, out 
of its glare, into — 

— And grabbed in a sudden cold sweat for the stubby 
trunk of a dwarf tree growing right out of the cliffside. 

For a second then, he hung there, sweating and 
looking down. He lay on a narrow ledge and the gorge 
was deep below. How deep, he did not stop to figure. It 
was deep enough. 

He twisted around and looked up the distance of a 
couple of meters to the ledge on which the Inn was built. 
It was not far. He could climb it. After a while, with his 
heart in his throat, John Tardy did. 

When he came back around the front of the Inn, in 
the morning sunlight, it was to find the Bluffer orating at 
a sort of open-air meeting, with the four who had harried 
John standing hangdog between two axemen and before 
an elderly Dilbian judgelike on a bench. 

“ — the mail!” the Hill Bluffer was roaring. “The 
mail is sacred! Anyone daring to lay fist upon the mail in 
transit — ” 

John, tottering forward, put an end to the trial in 
progress. 

Later on, after washing his slight scalp-wound and 



66 



GALAXY 



having taken on some more food concentrates and flat 
oeer for breakfast, John Tardy climbed back up on the 
Bluffer’s back and they were under way once more. 
Their route today led from Brittle Rock through the 
mountains to Sour Ford and the Hollows. The Hollows, 
John had learned, was clan-country for the Terror, and 
their hope was to catch him before he reached it. The 
trail now led across swinging rope suspension bridges 
and along narrow cuts in the rock — all of which the Hill 
Bluffer took not only with the ease of one well 
accustomed to them, but with the abstraction of one lost 
in deep thought. 

“Hey!” said John, at last. 

“Huh? What?” grunted the Hill Bluffer, coming to 
suddenly. 

“Tell me something,” said John, reaching out for 
anything to keep his carrier awake. “How’d the 
ambassador get the name Little Bite?” 

“You don’t know that?” exclaimed the Hill Bluffer. 
“I thought you Shorties all knew. Well, it was old 
Hammertoes down at Humrog.” 

The Bluffer chuckled. “Got drunk and all worked up 
about Shorties. ‘Gimme the good old days,’ he said, and 
went down to just make an example of Little Bite — 
Shorty One, we called him then. He pushes the door 
open far as it’ll go, but Little Bite’s got it fixed to only 
open part way. So there’s Hammertoes, with only one 
arm through the door, feeling around and hollering, ‘All 
right. Shorty! You can’t get away! I’ll get you — ’ when 
Little Bite picks up something sharp and cuts him a 
couple times across the knuckles. Old Hammertoes yells 
bloody murder and yanks his hand back. Slam goes the 
door.” 

The Hill Bluffer chortled to himself. “Then old 
Hammertoes comes back uptown, sucking his knuckles. 
What happened?’ says everybody. ‘Nothing,’ says 
Hammertoes. ‘Something must’ve happened — look at 
your hand,’ everybody says. ‘I tell you nothing 
happened!’ yells Hammertoes. ‘He wouldn’t let me in 
where I could grab hold of him, so I come away. And as 
for my hand, that’s got nothing to do with it. He didn’t 
hurt my hand hardly at all. He just give it a little bite!”’ 

The Hill Bluffer’s laughter rolled like thunder 
between the mountain walls. “Old Hammertoes never did 
live that down. Every time since, whenever he goes to 
give somebody a hard time, they all tell him, ‘Look out, 
Hammertoes, or I’m liable to give you a little bite!”’ 

John Tardy found himself laughing. Possibly it was 
the time and place of the telling, possibly the story, but 
he could see the situation in his mind’s eye and it was 
funny. 

“You know,” said the Bluffer over one furry 
shoulder when John stopped laughing, “you’re not bad 
for a Shorty.” He fell silent, appeared to wrestle with 
himself for a moment, then came to a stop and sat down 
in a convenient wide spot on the trail. 

“Get off,” he said. “Come around where I can talk to 



you.” 

John complied. He found himself facing the seated 
Dilbian, their heads about on a level. Behind the large, 
black-furred skull, a few white clouds floated in the high 
blue sky. 

“You know,” the Bluffer said, “the Streamside 
Terror’s mug’s been spilled.” 

“Spilled?” echoed John — then remembered this as a 
Dilbian phrase expressing loss of honor. “By me? He’s 
never even seen me.” 

“By Little Bite,” the Bluffer said. “But Little Bite’s a 
Guest in Humrog and the North Country. The Terror 
couldn’t call him to account personally for speaking 
against Shaking Knees giving the Terror 
Boy-Is-She-Built. He had to do something, though, so he 
took Greasy Face.” 

“Oh,” said John. 

“So you got to fight the Terror if you want Greasy 
back.” 

“Fight?” John blurted. 

“Man’s got his pride,” said the Bluffer. “That’s why 
I can’t figure you out. I mean you aren’t bad for a 
Shorty. You got guts — like with those drunks last night. 
But you fighting the Terror — I mean hell\” said the 
Bluffer, in deeply moved tones. 

Silently, John Tardy found himself in full agreement 
with the postman. 

“So what’re you going to do when you meet 
Streamside?” 

“Well,” said John, rather inadequately, “I don’t 
exactly know — ” 

“Well,” growled the Bluffer in his turn, “not my 
problem. Get on.” John went around behind his furry 
back. “Oh, by the way, know who it was tried to pitch 
you over the cliff?” 

“Who?” asked John. 

“The Cobbly Queen — Boy-Is-She-Built!” translated 
the Bluffer as John looked blank. “She heard about you 
and got ahead of us somehow ...” The Bluffer’s voice 
trailed off into a mutter. “If they’re thinking of 
monkeying with the mail ...” 

John paid no attention. He had his own fish to fry, 
and very fishy indeed they smelled just at the moment. 
Swaying on top of the enormous back as they took off 
again, he found himself scowling over the situation. 
Headquarters had said nothing about his being expected 
to fight some monstrous free-style scrapper of an alien 
race — a sort of gargantuan Billy the Kid with a number 
of kills to his credit. Joshua Guy had not mentioned it. 
Just what was going on here, anyway? 

Abruptly casting aside the security regulation that 
recommended a “discreet” use of the instrument, John 
lifted the wrist that bore his wrist-phone to his lips. 

“Josh — ” he began, and suddenly checked. A fine 
trickle of sweat ran coldly down his spine. 

The phone was gone. 



MAN IN THE MAILBAG 



67 



He had the rest of the morning to ponder this new 
development in the situation, and a good portion of the 
afternoon. He might have continued indefinitely if it had 
not been for a sudden interruption in their journey. 

They had crossed a number of spidery suspension 
bridges during the course of the day, and now they had 
come to another one, somewhat longer than any met so 
far. If this had been the only difference, John might have 
been left to his thoughts. But this bridge was different. 

Somebody had fixed it so they couldn’t get across. 

It happened that their end of the bridge had its 
anchors sunk in a rock face a little back and some seven 
or eight meters above their heads. All that had been 
done, simply enough, was to tighten the two main 
support cables at the far end. The sag of the span had 
straightened out, lifting the near end up above them, out 
of reach. 

The Hill Bluffer bellowed obscenely across the gap. 
There was no response from the windlass on the far side, 
or the small hut beyond. 

“What’s happened?” John Tardy asked. 

“I don’t know,” said the Bluffer, suddenly 
thoughtful. “It isn’t supposed to be rucked up except at 
night, to keep people from sneaking over not paying 
toll.” 

He reached as high as he could, but his fingertips fell 
far short. 

“Lift me up,” suggested John. 

They tried it, but even upheld by the ankles, at the 
full stretch of the Bluffer’s arms, John was rewarded 
only by a throat-squeezing view of the Knobby River 
below. 

“It’ll take five days to go around by Slide Pass,” 
growled the Bluffer, putting John down. 

John went over to examine the rock face. What he 
discovered about it did not make him happy, though 
perhaps it should have. It was climbable. Heart tucked in 
throat, he began to go up it. 

“Hey! Where’re you going?” bellowed the Hill 
Bluffer. 

John did not answer. He needed his breath; anyway, 
his destination was obvious. The climb up the rock was 
not bad for someone who had had some mountain 
experience, but a reaction set in when he wrapped his 
arms around the rough six-inch cable. He inched his way 
upward and got on top, both arms and both legs wrapped 
around the cable, and began a worm-creep toward the 
bridge end, floating on nothingness at a rather 
remarkable distance — seen from this angle — ahead of 
him. 

It occurred to him, after he had slowly covered about 
a third of the cable-distance in this fashion, that a real 
hero in a place like this should stand up and tightrope 
walk to the bridge proper. This, in addition to impressing 
the Bluffer, would shorten the suspense considerably. 
John Tardy concluded he must be a conservative and 
went on crawling. 

Eventually he reached the bridge, crawled out on it 



and lay panting for a while, then got up and crossed the 
gorge. At the far end, he knocked loose the lock on the 
windlass with a heavy rock, and the bridge banged down 
into position, raising a cloud of dust. 

Through this same cloud of dust, the Hill Bluffer 
was shortly to be seen advancing with a look of grim 
purpose. He stalked past John and entered the hut — 
from which subsequently erupted thunderous crashes, 
thuds and roars. 

John Tardy looked about for a place of safety. He 
had never seen two Dilbians fight, but it was only too 
apparent now what was going on inside. 

He was still looking around, however, when the 
sound ceased abruptly and the Hill Bluffer emerged, 
dabbing at a torn ear. 

“Old slaver-tongue,” he growled. “ She got at him.” 

“Who?” asked John. 

“Boy Is-She-Built. Well, mount up, Half Pint. Oh, by 
the way, that was pretty good.” 

“Good? What was?” 

“Climbing across the bridge that way. Took guts. 
Well, let’s go.” 

John climbed back up into his saddlebag and thought 
heavily. 

“You didn’t kill him?” he asked, as they started out 
once more. 

“Who? Old Winch Rope? Just knocked a little sense 
into him. Hell, there’s got to be somebody work the 
bridge. Hang on now. It’s all downhill from here and it’ll 
be twilight before we hit the Ford.” 

It was indeed twilight before they reached their 
stopping place at Sour Ford. John Tardy, who had been 
dozing, awoke with a jerk and sat up in his saddle, 
blinking. 

In the fading light, they stood in a large, grassy 
clearing semi-circled by forest. Directly before them was 
a long low log building, and behind it a smooth-flowing 
river with its farther shore shrouded in tree shadow and 
the approaching dusk. 

“Get down,” said the Bluffer. 

Stiffly, John Tardy descended, stamped about to 
restore his circulation, and followed the Bluffer’s huge 
bulk through the hide-curtain of the doorway to the 
building’s oil-lamplit interior. 

John discovered a large room like that at the Brittle 
Rock Inn — but one that was cleaner, airier, and filled 
with travelers a good deal less noisy and drunken. 
Gazing around for the explanation behind this difference, 
John caught sight of a truly enormous Dilbian, grizzled 
with age and heavy with fat, seated like a patriarch in a 
huge chair behind a table at the room’s far end. 

John and the Bluffer found a table and set about 
eating. But as soon as they were through, the postman 
led John up to the patriarch. 

“One Man,” said the Bluffer in a respectful voice, 
“this here’s the Half Pint Posted.” 

John Tardy blinked. Up close, One Man had turned 



68 



out to be even more awe-inspiring than he had seemed 
from a distance. He overflowed the carved chair he sat 
in, and the graying fur on top of his head all but brushed 
against a polished staff of hardwood laid crosswise on 
pegs driven into the wall two meters above the floor. His 
massive forearms and great pawlike hands were laid out 
on the table before him like swollen clubs of bone and 
muscle. But his face was almost biblically serene. 

“Sit down,” he rumbled in a voice so deep it sounded 
like a great drum sounding far off somewhere in a 
woods. “I’ve wanted to see a Shorty. You’re my Guest, 
Half Pint, for as long as you wish. Anyone tell you about 
me?” 

“I’m sorry — ” began John. 

“Never mind.” The enormous head nodded mildly. 
“They call me One Man, Half Pint, because I once held 
blood feud all by myself — being an orphan — with a 
whole clan. And won.” He looked calmly at John. “What 
you might call an impossible undertaking.” 

“Some of them caught him on a trail once,” put in 
the Hill Bluffer. “He killed all three.” 

“That was possible,” murmured One Man. His eyes 
were still on John. “Tell me, Half Pint, what are you 
Shorties doing here, anyhow?” 

“Well—” John blinked. “I’m looking for Greasy 
Face—” 

“I mean the entire lot of you,” One Man said. “There 
must be some plan behind it. Nobody asked you all here, 
you know.” 

“Well — ” said John again, rather lamely, and 
proceeded to try an explanation. It did not seem to go 
over very well, a technological civilization being hard to 
picture with the Dilbian vocabulary. 

One Man nodded when John Tardy was through. “I 
see. If that’s the case, what makes you think we ought to 
like you Shorties?” 

“Ought to?” said John, jolted into a reactive answer, 
for he did not have red hair for nothing. “You don’t 
ought to! It’s up to you.” 

One Man nodded. “Pass me my stick,” he said. 

One of the Dilbians standing around took down the 
staff from its pegs and passed it to him. He laid it on the 
table before him — a young post ten centimeters in 
thickness — grasping it with fists held over two meters 
apart. 

“No one’s ever been able to do this but me,” he said. 

Without lifting his fists from contact with the table, 
he rotated them to the outside. The staff sprang upward 
in the center like a bow, and snapped. 

“Souvenir for you,” said One Man, handing the 
pieces to John. “Good night.” 

He closed his eyes and sat as if dozing. The Bluffer 
tapped John on a shoulder and led him away, off to their 
sleeping quarters. 

Once in the Inn dormitory, however, John found 
himself totally unable to sleep. He had passed from utter 
bone-weariness into a sort of feverish wide-awakedness, 



GALAXY 



through which the little episode with One Man buzzed 
and circled like a persistently annoying fly. 

What had been the point of all that talk and 
wood-breaking? 

Suddenly and quietly, John sat up. Beside him, on 
his heap of soft branches, the Bluffer slept without 
stirring, as did the rest of the dormitory inhabitants. A 
single lamp burned high above, hanging from the 
rooftree. By its light, John got out and examined the 
broken pieces of wood. There was a little node or knot 
visible just at the point of breakage. A small thing, but — 

John frowned. He seemed surrounded by mysteries. 
The more he thought of it, the more certain he was that 
One Man had been attempting to convey some message 
to him. What was it? For that matter, what was going on 
between humans and Dilbians, and what had his mission 
to rescue Greasy Face to do with the business of 1 
persuading the recalcitrant Dilbians into a partnership? If 
that was indeed the aim, as Joshua Guy had said. 

John swung out of the pile of boughs and to his feet. 
One Man, he decided, owed him a few more — and 
plainer — answers. 

He went softly down the length of the dormitory and 
through the door into the common room of the Inn. 

There were few Dilbians about — they went early to 
bed. And One Man was also nowhere to be seen. He had 
not come into the dormitory, John knew. So either he had 
separate quarters, or else he had stepped outside for 
some reason .... 

John Tardy crossed the room and slipped out through 
the Inn entrance. He paused to accustom his eyes to the 
darkness and moved off from the building to get away 
from the window light. Slowly the night took shape 
around him, the wide face of the river running 
silver-dark in the faint light of the stars, and the clearing 
pooled in gloom. 

He circled cautiously around the Inn to its back. 
Unlike Brittle Rock, the back yard here was clear of 
rubbish, sloping gradually to the river. It was given over 
to smaller huts and outbuildings. Among these the 
darkness was more profound and he felt his way 
cautiously. 

Groping about in this fashion, quietly, but with some 
small, unavoidable noise, he saw a thin blade of yellow 
light. It cut through the parting of two leather curtains in 
the window of a hut close by him. He stepped eagerly 
toward it, about to peer through the crack, when, from 
deep wall shadow, a hand reached out and took his arm. 

“Do you want to get yourself killed?” hissed a voice. 

And, of course, it was human. And, of course, it 
spoke in Basic. 

Whoever had hold of him drew him deeper into the 
shadow and away from the building where they stood. 
They came to another hut whose door stood ajar on an 
interior blackness, and John was led into this darkness. 
The hand let go of his arm. The door closed softly. There 
was a scratch, a sputter, and an animal-oil lamp burst 



MAN IN THE MAILBAG 



69 



into light within the place. 

John squinted against the sudden illumination. When 
he could see again, he found himself looking into the 
face of one of the best-looking young women he had 
ever seen. 

She was a good fifteen centimeters shorter than he, 
but at first glance looked taller by reason of her slim 
outline in the tailored coveralls she wore. To John Tardy, 
after two days of Dilbians, she looked tiny — fragile. 
Her chestnut hair swept back in two wide wings on each 
side of her head. Her eyes were green above sharply 
marked cheekbones that gave her face a sculptured look. 
Her nose was thin, her lips firm rather than full, and her 
small chin was determined. 

John blinked. “Who — ?” 

“I’m Ty Lamorc,” she whispered fiercely. “Keep 
your voice down!” 

“Ty Lamorc? YouT ’ 

“Yes, yes!” she said impatiently. “Now — ” 

“Are y-you sure?” stammered John. “I mean — ” 

“Who were you expecting to run into way out here in 

— oh, I see!” She glared at him. “It’s that Greasy Face 
name the Dilbians gave me. You were expecting some 
horror.” 

“Certainly not,” said John stoutly. 

“Well, for your information, they just happened to 
see me putting on makeup one day. That’s where the 
name came from.” 

“Well, naturally. I didn’t think it was because — ” 

“I’ll bet! Anyway, never mind that now. The point 
is, what are you doing out here? Do you want to get 
knocked on the head?” 

“Who’d knock — ” John Tardy stiffened. “The 
Terror’s here!” 

“No, no!” She sounded annoyed. “Boy Is-She-Built 
is.” 

“Oh.” John frowned. “You know, I still don’t get it 

— her angle on all this, 1 mean.” 

“She loves him, of course,” said Ty Lamorc. 
“Actually, they make an ideal couple, by Dilbian 
standards. Now let’s get you back to the Inn before she 
catches you. She won’t follow you in there. You’re a 
Guest.” 

“Now wait — ” John took a deep breath. “This is 
silly. I came out here to find you. I’ve found you. Let’s 
head back right now. Not to Humrog— ” 

“You don’t,” interrupted Ty with feeling, 
“understand a blasted thing about these people, Half Pint 

— I mean. Tardy.” 

“John.” 

“John, you don’t understand the situation. The 
Streamside Terror left me here with Boy-Is-She-Built 
because I was slowing him down. That Hill Bluffer of 
yours is too fast for him, and he wanted to be sure to be 
in his own clan-country before you caught up with him, 
in case there would be — ” her voice faltered a little — 
“repercussions to what happens when you meet. It’s all a 
matter of honor, and that’s the point. You’re a piece of 



mail, John. Don’t you understand? The Hill Bluffer’s 
honor is involved, too.” 

“Oh,” said John. He was silent for a while. “You 
mean he’d insist on delivering me?” 

“What do you think?” 

“I see.” John was silent again. “Well, to blazes with 
it,” he said at last. “Maybe we can make it across a 
bridge and cut the ropes and get away from it all. We 
can’t leave you here.” 

Ty Lamorc did not reply at once. When she did, it 
was with a pat on his arm. 

“You’re nice,” she said softly. “I’ll remember that. 
Now get back to the Inn.” And then she had blown out 
the lamp and he could hear her go. 

Next morning, One Man was still nowhere to be 
seen. Nor, in the half hour that elapsed before they got 
going, did John Tardy catch any glimpse of Ty, or a 
female Dilbian who might be Boy-Is-She-Built. He 
mounted into the Hill Bluffer’s mailbag with his mind 
still engrossed by the happenings of the night before, and 
it continued to be engrossed as they began their third day 
of journey. 

They were descending now into a country of lower 
altitudes, though they were still in hill country. The 
ground was more gently hollowed and crested, and 
several new varieties of trees appeared. 

But John had no time to consider this. He rode 
through the cool hours of the morning and into noon’s 
heat still trying to find a common solution to the riddles 
that occupied his mind — about One Man, about the 
abduction of Ty Lamorc, and about his own peculiar lack 
of briefing. 

“Tell me,” said John finally to the Hill Bluffer, “is it 
a fact no other Dilbian could break that stick of One 
Man’s that same way?” 

“Nobody ever can,” replied the Bluffer, as they 
rounded a small hill and plunged through a thin belt of 
trees. “Nobody ever will.” 

“Well, you know,” said John, “back where 1 come 
from, we have a trick with something called a phone 
director — ” 

He stopped. For the Hill Bluffer himself had 
stopped, with a jolt that almost pitched John from the 
mailbag. John sat up, looked around the Dilbian’s head 
— and stared. 

They had passed through the woods. They had 
emerged into a small valley in which a cluster of 
buildings stood in the brown color of their peeled and 
weathered logs, haphazardly about a stream that ran the 
valley’s length. Beyond these houses there was a sort of 
natural amphitheater made by a curved indentation of the 
far rock wall of the valley. Past this the path went when 
it emerged from between the buildings and plunged into 
the trees again. 

However, none of this claimed John’s attention after 
the first second. He blinked, instead, at a living wall of 
five large Dilbians with axes. 



70 



GALAXY 



“Who do you think you’re stopping?” bellowed the 
Hill Bluffer. 

“Clan Hollow’s in full meeting,” responded the 
central axeman. “The Great-Grandfathers want to see 
you both. You come with us.” 

The axemen formed around the Bluffer and John. 
They led off down and through the village and beyond to 
the amphitheater that was swarming with Dilbians of all 
ages. Several hundred of them were there, and more 
accumulating, below a ledge of rock where six ancient 
Dilbians sat. 

“This is the mail!” stormed the Hill Bluffer as soon 
as they were close. “Listen, you Clan Hollows — ” 

“Be quiet, postman!” snapped the old Dilbian at the 
extreme right of the line as it faced John and the Bluffer. 
“Your honor will be guarded. Call the meeting.” 

“Great-Grandfathers of Clan Hollows, sitting in 
judgment upon a point of honor!” chanted a young 
Dilbian standing just below the ledge. He repeated the 
cry six times. 

There was a stir in the crowd. Looking around, John 
saw Ty Lamorc. With her was a plump young female 
that was most likely Boy-Is-She-Buiit. Boy-Is-She-Built 
was currently engaged in herding Ty to the foot of the 
ledge. She accomplished this and immediately began 
talking. 

“I’m Boy-Is-She-Built,” she announced. 

“We know you,” said the Great-Grandfather on the 
right end. 

“I’m speaking here for the Streamside Terror, who’s 
waiting over at Glenn Hollow for the Shorty known as 
the Half Pint Posted. That Shorty over there. His mug 
has been spilled — the Terror’s, I mean. This Shorty 
belongs to him — the male over there, I mean. Not that 
this female Shorty here with me doesn’t belong to him, 
too. He took her fair and square, and it serves those 
Shorties right. After all, nobody has more honor than the 
Terror — 

“That’s enough,” said the judge. “We will decide — ” 

“I should think you wouldn’t even have to call a 
meeting over it. After all, it’s perfectly plain — ” 

“I said that's enough! Be quiet, female!” roared the 
end judge. 1 

“Well?” interjected one of the other judges testily. 
“We’ve heard the arguments. The Shorties are both here. 
What’s left to say?” 

“Can I speak?” boomed a new voice, and the crowd 
parted to let One Man come up before the ledge of rock. 
The Great-Grandfathers thawed visibly as only great 
men can in the company of their peers. 

“One Man is always welcome to speak,” piped an 
ancient who had not spoken before, and whose voice, 
with age, had risen almost to the pitch of a human 
baritone. 

“Thank you,” said One Man. He raised his head and 
his voice rose with it, carrying easily out over the 
assembled Dilbians. “Just think this over. That’s what 



I’ve got to say. Think deep about it — because it may be 
Clan Hollows’ decision here is going to be binding on 
just about everybody — us and Shorties alike.” 

He waved to the judges and went back into the 
crowd. 

“Thanks, One Man,” said the right-end judge. “Now, 
having heard from everybody important who had 
something to say, here’s our opinion. This is a matter 
concerning the honor of the Streamside Terror — ” 

“How about me?” roared the Hill Bluffer. “The mail 
must — ” 

“Hold your jaw about the mail!” snapped the 
right-end judge. “As I was saying, Terror’s mug was 
spilled by the Guest in Humrog. Quite properly, the 
Terror then spilled the mug of the Guest by stealing off 
one of the Guest’s household. This by itself is a dispute 
between individuals not touching Clan Hollows. But now 
here comes along a Shorty who wants to fight Terror for 
the stolen Shorty. And the question is, can Clan Hollows 
honorably allow the Terror to do so?” 

He paused for a moment, as if to let the point sink in 
on the crowd. 

“For us to do this in honor,” he continued, “the 
combat mentioned must be a matter of honor. And this 
point arises — is honor possible between a man and a 
Shorty? We Great-Grandfathers have sat up a full night 
finding an answer, and to do so we have had to ask 
ourselves, ‘What is a Shorty?’ That is, is it the same 
thing as us, a being capable of having honor and 
suffering its loss?” 

He paused again. The crowd muttered its interest. 

“A knotty question,” said the spokesman, with a 
touch of complacency in his voice. “But your 
Great-Grandfathers have settled it.” 

The crowd murmured this time in admiration. 

“What makes honor?” demanded the spokesman 
rhetorically. “Honor is a matter of rights — rights 
violated and rights protected. Have the Shorties among 
us had any rights? Guest-rights, only. Failing 
Guest-rights, can one imagine a Shorty defending and 
maintaining its rights in our world?” 

A chortle broke out in the crowd and spread through 
its listening ranks at the picture conjured up. 

“Silence!” snapped another of the judges. “This is 
not a house-raising.” 

The crowd went silent. 

“Your display of bad manners,” said the right-end 
judge severely, “has pointed up the same conclusion we 
came to — by orderly process of discussion. It is 
ridiculous to suppose a Shorty existing as an 
honor-bound equal in our world. Accordingly, the rules 
of honor are not binding. Both Shorties here will be 
returned unharmed to the Guest in Humrog. The Terror 
has lost no honor. The matter is closed.” 

He stood up. So did the other live 

Great-Grandfathers. 

“This meeting,” he said, “is ended.” 



MAN IN THE MAILBAG 



V 



“Not yet it isn’t!” bellowed the Hill Bluffer. 

He plunged forward to the edge of the rock bench, 
hauling John Tardy along by the slack in John’s jacket. 

“What do you all know about Shorties?” he 
demanded. “I’ve seen this one in action. When a bunch 
of drunks at Brittle Rock tried to make him do tricks like 
a performing animal, he fooled them all and got away. 
How’s that for defending his honor? On our way here, 
the Knobby Gorge Bridge was cranked up out of our 
reach. He risked his neck climbing up to get it down 
again, so’s not to be slowed in getting his paws on the 
Terror. How’s that for a willingness to defend his rights? 

I say this Shorty here’s as good as some of us any day. 
Maybe he isn’t any bigger’n a two-year-old baby,” 
roared the Hill Bluffer, “but I’m here today to tell you 
he’s all guts!” 

He spun on John. “How about it, Shorty? You want 
Greasy Face handed back to you like scraps from a 
plate — ” 

John’s long cogitations at last paid off. These and 
something just witnessed in the Clan Meeting had 
thrown the switch he had been hunting for. 

“Show me that skulking Terror!” he shouted. 

The words had barely passed his lips when he felt 
himself snatched up. The free air whistled past his face. 
The Hill Bluffer had grabbed him in two huge hands and 
was now running toward the far woods with him, like a 
football player with a ball. A roar of voices followed 
them; looking back, John saw the whole of Clan Hollows 
in pursuit. 

John blinked. He was being jolted along at 
something like fifty kilometers an hour, and the crowd 
was coming along behind at the same rate. Or were they? 
For a long second, John hesitated, then allowed himself 
to recognize the inescapable fact. All praise to the 
postman — the Bluffer was outrunning them! 

John felt the thrill of competition in his own soul. He 
and the Hill Bluffer might be worlds apart biologically, 
but, by heaven, when it came to real competition. 

Abruptly, the shadow of the further forest closed 
about them. The Hill Bluffer ran on dropped needles 
from the conifers, easing to a lope. John Tardy climbed 
over his shoulder into the mailbag and hung on. 

The forest muffled the roar of pursuit. They 
descended one side of a small hollow and, coming up the 
other, the Bluffer dropped to his usual ground-eating 
walk. On the next downslope, he ran again. And so he 
continued, alternating his pace as the ground shifted. 

“How far to the Terror?” asked John. 

“Glen Hollow,” puffed the Hill Bluffer. He gave the 
answer in Dilbian units that worked out to just under 
eight kilometers. 

About ten minutes later, they broke through a small 
fringe of trees to emerge over the lip of a small cuplike 
valley containing a meadow split by a stream which, in 
the meadow’s center, spread into a pool. The pool was a 
good fifty meters across and showed the sort of color 



that indicates a fair depth. By the poolside, a male 
Dilbian was just looking up at the sound of their 
approach. 

John leaned forward and said quietly to the HiF 
Bluffer, “Put me down by the deepest part of the water. 
Reaching to his waist, he loosened the buckle of the belt 
threaded through the loops on his pants. 

The Hill Bluffer grunted and continued his descent 
At the water’s margin, some dozen meters from the 
waiting Dilbian, he stopped. 

“Hello, postman,” said the Dilbian. 

“Hello, Terror,” answered the Bluffer. “Mail.” 

The Terror looked curiously past the Bluffer’s head 
at John. 

“So that’s the Half Pint Posted, is it?” he said. “They 
let you come?” 

“No, we just came,” said the Bluffer. 

While the Terror stared at John Tardy, John had been 
examining the Terror. The other Dilbian did not, at first 
glance, seem to live up to his reputation. He was big, but 
nowhere near the height of the Hill Bluffer, nor the 
awe-inspiring massiveness of One Man. John noted, 
however, with an eye which had judged physical 
capabilities among his own race, the unusually heavy 
boning of the other’s body, the short, full neck, and. 
more revealing than any of these, the particularly poised 
balance exhibited by the Terror’s thick body. 

John Tardy threw one quick glance at the water 
alongside and slid down from the Bluffer’s back. The 
Bluffer moved off and, with no attempt at the amenities, 
the Streamside Terror charged. 

John turned and dived deep into the pool. 

He expected the Terror to follow him immediately 
reasoning the other was too much the professiona 
fighter to take chances, even with a Shorty. And, indeed 
the water-shock of the big body plunging in after John 
made him imagine the Terror’s great clawed hands al 
but scratching at his heels. John stroked desperately for 
depth and distance. He did have a strategy of battle, but 
it all depended on time and elbow room. He changed 
direction underwater, angled up to the surface, and 
flinging the water from his eyes with a jerk of his head 
looked around him. 

The Terror, looking the other way, had just broken 
water four meters off. 

John dived again and proceeded to get rid of boots, 
pants and jacket. He came up again practically under the 
nose of the Terror and was forced to dive once more. But 
this time, as he went down, he trailed from one fist the 
belt he had taken from his trousers, waving in the water 
like a dark stem of weed. 

Coming up the third time at a fairly safe distance 
John discovered the Terror had spotted him and was 
coming after him. John grinned to himself and dived, as 
if to hide again. But under the water he changed 
direction and swam directly at his opponent. He saw the 
heavy legs and arms churning toward him overhead 



72 



GALAXY 



They moved massively but relatively slowly through the 
water, and in this he saw the final proof he needed. He 
had guessed that, effective as the Terror might be against 
other Dilbians, in the water his very size made him slow 
and clumsy in comparison to a human — in possibly all 
but straightaway swimming. 

Now John let his opponent pass him overhead. Then, 
as it went by, he grabbed the foot. And pulled. 

The Terror instinctively checked and dived. John, 
flung surfaceward, let go and dived — this time behind 
and above the Dilbian. He saw the great back, the 
churning arms, and then, as the Terror turned once more 
toward the surface, John closed in, passing the belt 
around the thick neck and twisting its leather length 
tight. 

At this the Terror, choking, should have headed 
toward the surface, giving John a chance to breathe. The 
Dilbian did, John got his breath — and there the battle 
departed from John’s plan entirely. 

John had simply failed to give his imagination full 
rein. He had, in spite of himself, been thinking of the 
Dilbian in human terms — as a very big man, a man with 
vast but not inconceivable strength. It is not 
inconceivable to strangle a giant man with a belt. But 
how conceivable is it to strangle a grizzly? 

John was all but out of reach, stretched at arm’s 
length by his grip on the belt, trailing like a lamprey 
attached to a lake trout. But now and then the Terror’s 
huge hand, beating back at him through the water, 
brushed against him. Only brushed — but each impact 
slammed John about like a chip in the water. His head 
rang. The water roared about him. His shoulder numbed 
to a blow and his ribs gave to another. 

His senses began to fog; and he tightened his grip on 
the belt — for it was, in the end, kill or be killed. If he 
did not do for the Terror, there was no doubt the Terror 
would. .do for. .him. 

Choking and gasping, he found his hands no longer 
on the belt, but clawing at the grassy edge of the pond. 
Hands were helping him. He pulled himself up on the 
slippery margin. His knees found solid ground. He 
coughed water and was suddenly, ungracefully sick. 
Then he blacked out. 

He came around after an indeterminate time to find 
his head in someone’s lap. He blinked upward and a blur 
of color slowly turned into the face of Ty Lamorc, very 
white and taut — and crying. 

“What?” he croaked. 

“Oh, shut up!” she said. She was wiping his damp 
face with a rag of cloth that was nearly as wet as he was. 

“No — ” he managed. “I mean — what’re you doing 
here?” He tried to sit up. 

“Lie down!” 

“I’m all right — 1 think.” He struggled into sitting 
position. The whole area of Glen Hollow, he saw, was 
aswarm with Dilbians. A short way off, a knot of them 
were gathered on the pool-bank around something. 



“What — ?” he began. 

“The Terror, Half Pint,” said a familiar voice, and he 
looked up at the looming figure of the Hill Bluffer, 
mountainous from this angle. “He’s still out. It’s your 
fight, all right.” He went off, and they could hear him 
informing the other group down the bank that the Shorty 
was up and talking. 

John Tardy looked at Ty. 

“What happened?” he asked. 

“They had to pull him out. You made it to shore by 
yourself.” She found a handkerchief somewhere, wiped 
her eyes and blew her nose vigorously. “You were 
wonderful.” 

“ Wonderful ?” said John, still too groggy for subtlety. 
“I was out of my head to even think of it!” He felt his 
ribs gingerly. “I better get back to Humrog and have an 
X-ray of this side.” 

“Oh, are your ribs broken?” 

“Maybe just bruised. Wow!” said John, coming on 
an especially tender spot. 

“Oh!” wept Ty. “You might have been killed! And 
it’s all my fault!” 

“Your fault?” said John. He spotted the massive 
figure of One Man breaking away from the group around 
the fallen Terror and hissed quickly at her. “Hurry. Help 
me up.” She assisted him clumsily to his feet. “Tell me, 
did they find anything around the Terror’s neck when 
they pulled him out?” 

She stared at him and wiped her eyes. “Why, no. 
What should they find around his neck?” 

“Nothing,” whispered John. “Well!” he said as One 
Man rolled up to a halt before them. “What do you think 
of the situation?” 

“I think, Half Pint,” said One Man, “that it’s all very 
interesting. Very interesting indeed. I think you Shorties 
may be getting a few takers now on this business of 
going off into the sky and learning things.” 

“You do, eh? How about you, for one?” 

“No-o,” said One Man slowly. “No, I don’t think me. 
I’m a little too old to jump at new things that quick. 
Some of the young ones’ll be ready, though. The Terror, 
for one, possibly. He’s quite a bright lad, you know. Of 
course, now that you’ve done the preliminary 
spadework, I may put in a good word for you people here 
and there.” 

“Mighty nice of you — now," said John, a little 
bitterly. 

“Nothing wins like a winner, Half Pint,” rumbled 
One Man. “You Shorties should have known that. Matter 
of fact, I’m surprised it took you so long to show some 
common sense. You just don’t come in and sit down at a 
man’s table and expect him to take your word for it that 
you’re one of the family. As I said to you once before, 
who asked you Shorties to come here, anyway, in the 
first place? And what made you think we had to like 
you? What if, when you were a lad, some new kid moved 
into your village? He was half your size, but he had a 



MAN IN THE MAILBAG 



73 



whole lot of shiny new playthings you didn’t have, and 
he came up and tapped you on the shoulder and said, 
‘C’mon, from now on we’ll play my sort of game!’ 
How’d you think you’d have felt?” 

He eyed John shrewdly out of his hairy face. 

“I see,” said John, after a moment. “Then why’d you 
help me?” 

“Me? Help you? I was as neutral as they come. 
What’re you talking about?” 

“We’ve got something back home called a phone 
directory — a book like those manuals Little Bite has 
down at Humrog. It’s about this thick — ” he measured 
with thumb and forefinger. “And for one of us Shorties, 
you’d say it was a physical impossibility to pick it up 
and tear it in two. But some of us can do it.” He eyed 
One Man. “Of course, there’s a trick to it.” 

“Well, now,” said One Man judiciously, “I can 
believe it. Directories, thick sticks, or first-class 
hill-and-alley scrappers — there’s a trick to handle 
almost any of them. Not that I’d ever favor a Shorty over 
any of us in the long run — don’t get that idea.” He 
looked around them. The Streamside Terror was being 
helped out of the Glen and most of the crowd was 
already gone. “We’ll have to get together for a chat one 
of these days, Half Pint. Well, see you in the near future. 
Shorties.” 

John Tardy wiped a damp nose with the back of his 
hand and stared after One Man. Then he turned to Ty 
Lamorc. 

“Now,” he said, “whaf d you mean — it was all your 



fault?” 

“It was,” she said miserably. “It was all my idea. 
Earth knew we weren’t getting through to the Dilbians, 
so they sent me out. And I — ” she gulped — “I 
recommended they send out a man who conformed as 
nearly as possible to the Dilbian psychological profile 
and we’d get him mixed up in a Dilbian emotional 
situation — to convince them we weren’t the utter little 
aliens we seemed to be. They’ve got a very unusual 
culture here. They really have. I never thought 
Boy-Is-She-Built would catch up with you and nearly 
kill you and take your wrist-phone away. You were 
supposed to be able to stay in contact with Joshua Guy 
so he could always rescue you from the other end.” 

“I see. Any why,” queried John, very slowly and 
patiently, “did you decide not to let me in on what was 
going on?” 

“Because,” she wailed, “I thought it would be better 
for you to react like the Dilbians in a natural, 
extroverted, uncerebral way!” 

“I see,” said John again. They were still standing 
beside the pool. He picked her up — she was quite light 
and slender — and threw her in. There was a shriek and 
a satisfying splash. John turned and walked off. 

After half a dozen steps, he slowed down, turned and 
went back. She was clinging to the bank. 

“Here,” he said gruffly, extending his hand. 

“Thag you,” she said humbly, with her nose full of 
water, as he hauled her out. 

—GORDON R. DICKSON 



Q X Publications 

c/o A.D.A.M. Inc., PO Box 8415, 
Santa Fe, NM 87504-8415 
Tel: (505)982-3402 
Fax: (505) 983-401 1 



The Way of the One Note 

The Way of the One Note is an ancient school of music, 
but it doesn't teach music in any ordinary way. Passed on 
exclusively through oral teachings, the information 
contained in this small book is the only known written 
exposition of this special school available in print. Each 
page is illustrated with an original sumi-e painting by Dm 
Kristel. $10. 

A Brief History of Music 

A real history that begins, not with Medieval music, but 
with the wind and the music of Creation. Illustrated with 
images from cultures around the world. $10. 

Garden Beyond Words: 

Bonsai • Bonseki • Gardens • Photographs 
An exquisitely boxed set of both color and black and 
white images that conveys the essential beauty of a "little 
tree" and the hidden meaning of a true garden space. 

$85. 



Books by Dru Kristel 

Breath was the First Drummer 

This forthcoming book begins where Mickey Hart's Planet 
Drum leaves off. Yes, drums have been used by shamen In 
cultures throughout the world, but why? Exactly what 
effect does sound have on the human body and how is it 
used to produce a transformational effect? Dm Kristel 
blends the esoteric and the practical in his discussion of 
kinds of drums, tuning dmms, drumming and mantra, 
sound and light, and the Great Wheel of Life. $108. 

Watermarks 

Written in collaboration with Makundananda Dorje 
Rinpoche, Watermarks is a Treatise on Recognizing Clear 
Light Known as the Great Seal of Void Nature. This 
workbook outlines for the first time in one place a concise 
description of Buddhist lineages, the difference between 
Tantra and Sutra, and the hidden methods implicit in the 
Mahamudra teachings. $ 1 5. 

Whistling Fires and Listening Doors 

This collection features Martin SilverwolPs haiku - simple 
and evocative poems based on the Japanese tradition - 
paired on each page with the whimsical black and white 
computer graphics of Marta Jones. Hardbound, signed 
and numbered by the artists. $49. 




74 



GALAXY 




TREK DIARY 

By BJO TRIMBLE 

Illustrated by Williamson 

COURT MARTIAL (CML) # 6 149-15 
Original titles: “Court Martial on Star Base 811”; 

“Courts Martial” 

German: “Kirk unter Anklage” (Kirk Under Accusation) 
Japanese:“Uchuu Gunpoukaigi” (Court Martial in Space) 
Portuguese: “Corte Marcial” (Court Martial) 

Story: DON M. MANKIEWICZ 

Teleplay: DON M. MANKIEWICZ & STEVEN W. 

CARABATSOS 
Director: MARC DANIELS 
Producer: GENE L. COON 
Executive Producer: GENE RODDENBERRY 
Associate Producer: ROBERT H. JUSTMAN 
Script Consultant: STEVEN W. CARABATSOS 
Aired: 2/2/67 

S TARDATE: 2947.3 — The Enterprise puts in at 
Starbase 1 1 for repairs to damage incurred during 
an ion storm. Kirk discovers that he faces a court 
martial for negligence resulting in the death of 
Lieutenant Commander Benjamin Finney. 

A former girlfriend of Kirk’s, Areel Shaw, is the 
Starfleet lawyer determined to prosecute the case to its 
fullest, even if it means ruining Kirk’s career. However, 
she still has a soft spot for the Captain and recommends 
shrewd, energetic Samuel T. Cogley for Kirk’s defense 
lawyer. Shaw’s prosecution is based on the Enterprise’s 
computer records, which Kirk claims are erroneous. By 
playing chess with the Enterprise computer, Spock finds 
that the programming has been tampered with. 

Resuming the trial aboard the Enterprise, the judges 
find that Finney is not dead but in hiding. A vengeful 



Finney changed the computer records to frame Kirk, who 
once logged a careless and potentially dangerous error of 
Finney’s. This prevented Finney’s promotion and 
expected rise through Starfleet ranks. Cogley wins 
Kirk’s case and promptly takes a new one: Finney’s 
defense. 

CAST: 

Kirk: WILLIAM SHATNER 

Spock: LEONARD NIMOY 

McCoy: DeFOREST KELLEY 

Uhura: NICHELLE NICHOLS 

Lieutenant Commander Benjamin Finney: RICHARD 

WEBB 

Computer (Voice): MAJEL BARRETT 
Helmsman Hansen: HAGAN BEGGS 
Portmaster Stone: PERCY RODRIGUEZ 
Samuel T. Cogley: ELISHA COOK Jr. 

Lieutenant Areel Shaw: JOAN MARSHALL 
Jame Finney: ALICE RAWLINGS 
Timothy: WINSTON De LUGO 
Personnel Officer: NANCY WONG 
Court Martial Board: 

Space Command Representative Lindstrom: 
WILLIAM MEADER 

Captain Chandra: REGINALD LAL SINGH 

Captain Krasnovsky: BART CONRAD 
Officer in club: TOM CURTIS 
Starbase Recorder computer (Voice): MAJEL 

BARRETT 

Kirk’s stunt double: CHUCK CLOW 
Finney’s stunt double: TROY MELTON 
UNCREDITED ATMOSPHERE: Other officers in club: 
5 extra males; 1 female; waitress; bartender aide; 4 
bridge personnel; Navigator; Engineer; Recorder’s voice 
for library computer; Recorder machine voice; 1 
Personnel officer 

NOTES: 

Sulu was originally to be named “Sumo” (8/15/66) 
and was supposed to be the helmsman — then wasn’t in 
the show at all. 

Studio memo: “Janice is much too close to Kirk and 
too involved in his personal life and decisions”, so her 
part in this episode was given to Uhura. They were 
already writing Grace Lee Whitney out of the show. 

“Jame” Finney was originally “Jamie” — it was 
pronounced the same. 

NBC Network Broadcast Standards Department sent 
memos on this script: 

( 1 ) Avoid any open-mouth kisses. 

(2) Delete “thank God” from Cogley’s speech. NBC 
was extremely sensitive to the Bible Belt, but Gene 
Roddenberry fought this, as he did all memos about 
common speech that might contain religious 
connotations. GR won on this one. 

GR liked the name “Lai” — later, in Star Trek: The 
Next Generation, the android Data named his android 
daughter “Lai.” 

Time jumped rapidly in this episode: it went from 



TREK DIARY 



75 



2947.3 in the teaser to 2948.5 in the first act. It is SD 
2950.1 during the search for Finney. 

The only way the court could have seen visual 
extracts from the ship’s computers of what happened 
during the ion storm is for the entire bridge to be 
recorded at all times — useful for courts martial. 

Kirk’s quarters on Starbase had no personality, just a 
vinyl couch, desk, chairs, vases and uninteresting 
paintings — very “hotel room.” 

Such rooms must be assigned to visiting starship 
captains, on the order of hotel rooms reserved for 
airplane flight personnel. 

The witness chair used in the court had a lighted 
place for the hands — possibly a built-in polygraph, 
though never clearly explained. Perhaps just a method of 
confirming identification, since the court-martial 
computer accepted small 3"x3" plastic rectangles: a 
personal I.D. disk, red-orange (for Spock), blue (Kirk) 
and gold (for Wong). 

It was stated that no starship commander had ever 
been court-martialed since 2948 (wonder who that was, 
and why?) 

Areel’s casual dress was short and yellow, with one 
very long sleeve of shocking pink, the other of violent 
lime green, all in a wild 1960s sheer paisley print! It 
looked dreadful on screen and even worse at the William 
Ware Theiss Auction to benefit the AIDS Project Angel 
Food. But someone liked it well enough to pay $3000.00 
for it — probably more in memory of Star Trek costume 
designer Bill Theiss. 

In the Starbase officer’s club, Areel’s very 1960s 
drink is a bright red semi-opaque liquid, garnished with 
5-6 pieces of fruit, a paper umbrella and a large piece of 
greenery that looks like escarole! 

The “white sound” device used to find Finney is a 
previously-used sensor. Well, they had to save money on 
props. 

Lieutenant Commander Finney wears two full 
stripes; Lt. Cdr. Spock wears one full stripe and one 
broken stripe. Hmmm? 

It is interesting to note that Engineering aboard a 
starship still uses spanner wrenches, or at least Finney 
used one to attack Kirk. 

Uhura takes over navigation when necessary; she is 
seldom allowed to do much more to show that she knows 
a great deal about running a starship. The best she can do 
is sit on arm of command chair in this episode. 

Many of Kirk’s classmates are much older than he 
and are still only lieutenants. This may be another 
indication that very few of the original Star Trek 
production crew knew much about military ways. 

Kirk’s former classmates and supposed friends turn 
away from him due to the Starbase rumor that he was at 
fault. In true human fashion, they decided his guilt 
without a trial. 

Suitcase-sized computers were predicted in this 
episode, long before it was supposed that computers 
could be made small enough to carry around. Cogley has 



one, but never uses it, preferring the biological one in his 
head & familiarity with a vast library of books. 

It has been 4 years and 7 months since Kirk and 
Areel had seen each other. No wonder she is willing to 
prosecute him! 

The term “Vulcanian” is still in use, though 
Roddenberry or Justman will soon point out that the 
word “Vulcan” can be used for both the planet and its 
natives. “Vulcan” was used henceforth. 

Spock specifies “positive gravity” implying there is 
a place with negative gravity .... 

McCoy calls Spock cold-blooded — and Spock 
thanks him. Spock seems quite distressed by Jame's 
outburst of temper. Spock is embarrassed to bring the 
computer extract to Stone — as if it makes him 
responsible for what he knows is an error. 

The USS Republic was atomic pile-powered — 
indicating that we went to space long before warp drive 
was discovered. Let’s hope so! 

According to this episode and WHERE NO MAN 
HAS GONE BEFORE, Academy cadets teach before 
they are assigned to space duty. Perhaps as with top 
grade and/or grad students teaching some classes at 
universities. 

When questioned about psychology, McCoy is 
modest: “I know something about it..”; in actuality he is 
an expert in the subject. 

Kirk clearly indicates what is foremost in his mind: 
“Nothing is more important than my ship.” 

The last scene, where Areel kisses Kirk goodbye, is 
fine in the TV version, but in the blooper reels she says 
seductively: “ . kiss the star of a ship captain ...” 

— BJO TRIMBLE 




Subscribe to Bjo Trimble's own SF Newsletter 

"The Newsletter for TV & Movie SF, Fantasy & Horror Fans!" 

P. O. Box 6858, Kingwood, TX 77325-6858 
Send $2.00 for sample issue 




76 



GALAXY 




FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION 

By CLAUDE NEEDHAM, Ph.D. 

Illustrated by Freas 

oney, bumble barf, wasp whoop, bee vomit, apis 
spew, hornet hoop, Hymenoptera hurl. These and 
several other not so flowery phrases refer to the 
regurgitated product from certain insects — mostly Apis 
mellifera. If someone walked up to you at a party with an 
invitation to partake of a sticky partially-digested amber 
fluid that had been robbed from wax holding vessels 
filled by vomit (from small flying insects) intended for 
storage, continued digestion and consumption by 
themselves and their children, would you say “Yes that 
sounds marvelous, I’d love to try some”? No. I don’t 
think so. No more than you would say, “Yes, I would 
love to pry open the calcified covering of a Pelecypoda 
and pour sweetened tomato puree mixed with spicy tuber 
root over the raw unprotected flesh of a living boneless 
bivalve mollusk swimming in a teaspoon of residual sea 
water and plummet the same still throbbing animal into a 
pool of acid at the bottom of my stomach.” No, only the 
fevered mind of a horror film writer could imagine such 
a gruesome torture inflicted upon another. 

Apis mellifera — the common honey bee — what’s 
its story? How is it that a bunch of be-winged factories 
can turn random droplets of plant nectar into honey? Do 
they worship and make supplications to the great and 
fearsome god Hand that orders their lives with divine 
indifference? How long does it take a train traveling 50 
mph due east leaving Pittsburgh at 6:00 a.m. to meet a 
boat traveling due west up the Hudson River? Will 



Donna discover that Brad is not the lover she hoped but 
rather the uncle of Phil who removed her left ear 
mistakenly believing it to be a malignant tumor while all 
the time Joan was secretly dating Donna’s first cousin 
the assistant? Will this author be committed in time to 
spare us further inane questions? Can we move on to the 
next paragraph without the threat of mayhem? These and 
many other questions are answered following this 
paragraph break. 

Nectar is not bad stuff. Water and sugar. Add a little 
food coloring, carbonization and label. .you could have 
a nice soft drink. Problem is it’s spread all over the 
pasture. Even the engineering department at Davis 
School of Agriculture would be hard pressed to come up 
with a machine that could gather nectar in a cost efficient 
manner. Let’s face it, these little bee guys work cheap. 
Free nectar and pollen and they’re happy. Heck they can 
have all the pollen they want as far as I’m concerned. 
The less of the stuff in the atmosphere the better I like it. 
Have you ever seen a picture of a pollen grain under an 
electron microscope? I have — medieval instruments of 
confession look more inviting. The Spanish Inquistion, 
now there’s a lively bunch that knew how to inspire 
conversion. Even as we prepare to enter the 21st century, 
thousands of Mexican and Spanish Jews are still hiding 
under the cover of Catholicism. 

So a few industrious buzzers collect the nectar — 
then what? Were you aware that the water content of 
nectar varies? Well, it does. Anything from thirty or 
forty percent to ninety percent or more. Maybe less, 
maybe more, who’s got the time to sample the water 
content of each and every flower? Besides some of these 
flowers are open to low humidity drying winds that 
would suck the water content from a rock. With the 
random effects of weather and the natural distribution of 
variability amongst the flora it’s no surprise that the 






FOR YOUR INFORMATION 



77 



water content is not uniform. Heck dam diversity is the 
seed of evolution. However, as any marketer can advise, 
consumers prefer to buy products that they can trust to 
be the same from day to day and purchase to purchase. 
Bottom line: it just won’t work to deliver a product that 
varies from watery to thick — depending on time of 
year, plants involved, and humidity of the pasture. 
Fortunately, the bees have solved this little problem 
quite nicely. 

The forager bees (little buzzers that fly around 
sucking up nectar from flowers and such) gather the raw 
material. These guys forage for nectar, gather and bring 
it back to the hive. Since they don’t have handy-dandy 
little buckets (like in cartoons) the bees suck the honey 
down using a convenient organ located just posterior to 
the mouth affectionately called the sucking pump. From 
here the nectar is shuttled down the esophagus into a 
thin-walled sac (corresponding to the crop of other 
insects) called the honey stomach — so called because it 
is used to carry nectar or honey. Separating the honey 
stomach and the ventriculus (the real stomach) is a small 
sphincter like opening called the stomach mouth. The 
stomach mouth prevents the nectar from passing from 
the honey stomach into the further reaches of the honey 
bees’ digestive system. It is here in the honey stomach 
that the nectar is stored during the long flight from 
flower to hive. 

Depending on whether a nectar-find was worthy of 
pride or required help, the first thing a foraging bee 
would do upon returning to the hive is dance a little jig 
— thus giving the other foragers a clue to the size and 
location of a nectar-find. After this oratory in farting and 
tap-dancing is complete the forager bee (still loaded with 
a stomach full of nectar) would look for a house bee to 
receive the raw nectar. When a house bee is found, that 
is not otherwise occupied, the forager bee regurgitates 
said raw materials. As forging bees are apt to be heard 
saying, “I have enough to do foraging without having to 
do all the processing as well. You’d think with sitting 
around the hive all day she could keep the combs cleaner 
and do a little processing.” 

In keeping with all post- industrialized factory 
management, the foraging bees leave the post-gathering 
production to house bees. Having completed their 
unionized roll of gathering, the foraging bees regurgitate 
the only slightly digested nectar and let the house bees 
suck it down for further processing. When the forager 
bee has passed a drop of nectar along, the house bee 
moves into action working its tiny little jaws to the chitin 
converting the nectar droplet into honey. 

The house bee has two main processing 
responsibilities. The first is to dehydrate the nectar into a 
stable product with batch to batch consistency. This is 
accomplished by vomiting the nectar and chewing it 
down over and over again. Each cycle of the process 



takes about twenty seconds. Given that on the average a 
house bee will work approximately fifteen to twenty 
minutes on each droplet of nectar, that translates into 
about fifty chew-swallow-regurgitate cycles — 
guaranteed to eventually dry out even the watery-est 
nectar. When the nectar’s water content reaches an 
agreed upon concentration (set by arbitrated agreement 
between management and labor) the house bee stops 
chewing and adds the partially digested nectar to a cell in 
the honey comb. It is here that the second processing 
responsibility of the house bee is accomplished. 

The sugar profile of raw nectar varies from simple 
(glucose and fructose) to complex (sucrose). That will 
never do for feeding young baby bees and besides 
sucrose is too close to the white crystals of death 
extracted from sugar cane and beets to be very effective 
on the retail market. Nope, in the health food market 
something different (and sweeter) is required — at least 
if one wants to compete for that ever elusive (and 
perhaps mob controlled) shelf-space. 

To solve this marketing dilemma honey bees inject 
the enzyme invertase into the nectar. The invertase 
enzyme converts sucrose into smaller, simpler and 
sweeter sugars. The process is begun in the stomach to 
be completed in the wax holding tanks of the honey 
comb over the course of a few weeks. 

Next time before complaining of how much work it 
is to lay in a supply of canned tomatoes and pickles for 
the winter, you may wish to recall the job of the house 
bee and count yourself lucky. Who would want to chew 
and spit up cucumbers all night long? Come to think of 
it, that’s the very thing that happened to me the last time 
I had cucumbers in my salad. Perhaps I should put it into 
a wax-bucket next to the nursery and let it finish 
digesting there. Strained cucumbers, that’s one food 
product you don’t see on the grocery store shelves 
everyday. 

—CLAUDE NEEDHAM, Ph.D. 



Bardotown™ Training Drill 

Sequences of images you perceive when 
actually going through the Bardo. 
Dispel your mechanical, involuntary 
responses to the Bardo. 

1/3 off the retail price of $39.95 
per video when you subscribe 
to the full 2-year program 

CALL US AT THE UNION LABEL FOR MORE 
INFORMATION ABOUT THIS EXCITING PROGRAM: 

1 - 800 - 869-0658 



'This and several of my other ideas are picked up on sale from a local Paranoids-R-Us. The franchise fee is not bad, but they require a home phone 
number on the application. Thus cutting the total number of applicants to near-zero. The few that do make it through the franchise process have the 
good sense to "accidentally" transpose a few digits in their home phone number — guaranteeing resourceful owners. 



78 



GALAXY 



Jewels of Ancient lands 



TREASURES 

FOR THOSE WHO REMEMBER THE PAST . 

FAR AWAY PLACES AND LONG FORGOTEN LANDS 









DflSfy&lcd. from the mystery and depth of ancient people 
whose spirit lives on through the aesthetic vi$or, creative force 
and delicate craftsmanship 




Black pearls, flat barrel Labradorite, 
hand-crafted Sterling Silver Sri Lanka granulated 
cage beads and cage rondels , on Sterling Silver 
link. ]AL 4025 - $ 599 



Jewels of Ancient Lands necklaces . 

Rare, sought-after creations which will last for generations. 



WE KNOW BECAUSE 

WE MADE THE ORIGINALS 



for information call 1-800-869-0658 

‘ 1 '< ■ .1 , 



ADVERTISEMENT 



79 



Feeling Left out? Want to be “in the know”? 

THEN BE ENUGHTENED BY 

Robert Anton Wilson 
& E. J. Gold's 




Secrets of the Illuminati 



iT* »rt 7 iY t i :■■■. 

Jthe occult secrets of the oldest 
& MOST widespread conspiracy 

ON THE PLANET! 




What did they know? 

When did they know it? 

LISTEN TO TWO AUTHORITIES 
ON THE SUBJECT! 

Get this set of 2 60-minute cassettes, 
$16.98 PLUS SHIPPING AND HANDLING 

call 1-800-869-0658, 

OR USE THE ORDER FORM ON PAGE 90 

Gateways Books and Tapes 




CHAOS AND BEYOND 

THE BEST OF TRAJECTORIES 

Edited by Robert Anton Wilson 

Selected materials from the first 
twelve hard-to-find issues of the 
Trajectories Newsletter published in 
a quality paperback. 

It's a perfect introduction to the often 
hilarious, always brilliant work of this 
important 20th century philosopher. 
And humorist. And novelist. And critic. 

$14.95 plus shipping and handling 



Other recommended works 
by Dr. Wilson: 




More Robert Anton Wilson: 



THE EIGHT SELVES 
WITHIN US 



An introduction to Dr. Wilson's popular 
workshop on the eight circuits of the 
evolving human nervous system. 

Two 60-minute cassettes, 

$1 6.98 plus shipping and handling. 



Illuminatus! (with Robert Shea) 
This esoteric-SF intellectual- 
thriller started and ended its own 
genre. An incredible book! 

$12.95 plus shipping and handling 

The New Inquisition 

Free-thinking almost illegal! 
Essays and articles with Wilson's 
trademarks: humor and lucidity. 

$12.95 plus shipping and handling 

Wilhelm Reich in Hell 
Must See To Appreciate! 
$12.95 plus shipping and handling 



Please call 1 -800-869-0658, 
or use the order form on page 90. 

Also: Ask about rare copies of Wilson 
and E. J. Gold's discussion of the 
esoteric meanings of Star Wars ! 



for ordering information: 

1 - 800 - 869-0658 

Gateways Books and Tapes 
P.O. Box 370 
Nevada City CA 95959 



80 



GALAXY 



Are you ready for ? ... 



The Original Handbook for the 



Recently Deceased 

by Claude Needham 



Tech Manual — Field Operator' s Edition 



The Original 

HANDBOOK FOR THE 
RECENTLY DECEASED 



By Claude Needham, Ph.D. 



Gateways / I.D.H.H.B., Inc. Publishers 
Nevada City, California 



Before quoting from this book, please check 
with the publisher for corrections to the 
final manuscript . 



For more information see back cover 



Metaphysical humor at its best 



WARNING: 

If you are reading this, 
you are probably dead. 

The “Warning" on the outside ot this book was no joke. This 
package has been hermetically sealed (by a band of hermets 
working in Northern California) to prevent tampering by the 
living. If you were able to break the seal, then you are either 
dead or a recent book purchaser. 



Quid Pro Erratum Sanctorum 

You have been warned! This book contains great and amazing 
secrits meant only for the eyes of the dead. 

If you are not dead, and you have inadvertently seen this page, 
please for your own protection stop reading now! Take a six- 
pack of beer to the Roller Derby and pick a fight during halftime. 
Purge your system of any effects of the apres vie with a 
generous internal rush of adrenalin. Do this before it is too late. 
This book is worthless if opened before you are seriously dead. 

You have been warned! 



Publication Information 


From Gateways Books & Tapes 


Title: 


The Original Handbook lor the 
Recently Deceased 


Price: 


$12.50 Trade Paperback 
$135.00 Deluxe Art Edition 


ISBN: 


0-89556-060-2 Trade Paperback 
0-89556-093-3 Deluxe Art Edition 


Size: 


5 1/2- X 8 1/2" - Trade Paperback 
81/2X11"- Deluxe Art Edition 


Subject Categories: 


Humor/Death & Dying/Metaphysics 


Publication: 


Fall, 1992 


About the Book: 


This is the latest Gateways title in the 
category of "metaphysical humor." It Is a 
technical manual, companion volume to 
Gateways’ well-known American Book ot 
the Dead, and an introduction to Bar- 
domania. The Handbook is a step by 
step, day by day practical preparation for 
what happens to you when you are 
dead— except that typically by the time 
you realize how practical it really is, 
you're already dead. Hence the warning: 
"Do not read this book unless you are 
dead. This book is not for the living. If 


AmuH the author: 


you're not dead, this book is not for you." 


Dr. Needham is a bio-physics research 
specialist, as well as a sculptor, author 
end humorist. His background is 
Strongest in plasma physics and wave- 
form research. His loves are alabaster or 




a good piece of lignum vitae. 


Contact: 


Iven Lourie. Editor 




Gateways Books & Tapes 


m # 


P.O. Box 370, Nevada City. CA 95959 


Tel.: (800) 869-0658 or (916) 477-1116 




Fax: (916) 432-1810 


— » mr ■ . 






ADVERTISEMENT 



81 









Gateways 


</\nnouncLn$ ... 






zf-rom the publishers of twentieth 




AUen«s 


century science fiction classics, the 




Street Griiide 


photobio$raphy of tyold, galaxy 




To 


edit lor, science fiction author, artist 




Planet 


and son of famed c H-£. t^old. 
eaturln $ a photographic panorama 




the Biography of 


of 

the cHall of ‘jfame of 




E.J. GOLD 
ASA 




Science-Fiction Lover 


the history of science fiction . 




by Linda Corriveau 

A. 


For information: 1-800-869-0658 




1 SIRIUS 

SIRIUS SCIENCE FICTION 


THE BEST DOGON SCIENCE FICTION IN THE GALAXY. 







ATTENTION, 

GALAXIANSP 

THE OFFICIAL Galaxy 
COMMEMORATIVE 
ALBUM IS HERE! IT'S 



ZAPHOD and THE ALIEN ALL STARS 







The Best of Zaphod 
The Best of Zaphod 
The Best of Zaphod 
and more of the Best of Zaphod! 

"Well that's very nice," you might say, "but where's my 



SPECIAL DEAL?/" jl 

ALLRIGHT. OK. Here It Is: * 



FOR $30 You Get 
— The Best of Zaphod — 

and 

THE Q&XXy T-SHIRT! 



Just call 1-800-869-0658, or you can mail or fax 
the convenient order form in this issue. 

(TAPE ONLY $15 MT147) 

(SHIRT ONLY $25 L-XL-XXL) 




82 



GALAXY 





ADVERTISEMENT 



83 



A fine copy of this 
important and very early 
graphic work by Marc 
Chagall. This little hook is 
rich in images of the Stetle 
(the little Jewish ghetto 
villages which dotted the 
Russian landscape) in 
which Chagall spent his 
childhood before 
emigrating to France. 

[4], 95, [3] pp. With 5 original etchings 
by Chagall. 4to. Original wrappers. 
Paris: Au Sans Pareil, 1926. 



This volume contains five hard-to-find 
original etchings, one of which is reminiscent of 
"The Birthday", one of Chagall's more famous 
paintings - that's the one you see in High 
School Art Appreciation 101, where he's 
serpentinely flying and kissing her, remember? 

Maternite provides a time-machine allowing 
us to peek into the earliest period of Chagall's 
art -- a period we may not be able to afford to 
collect in oils, watercolors or gouaches, but 
which are very affordable in etching format. 

Here, Marc Chagall demonstrates the 
clearest examples of his early ingenuousness 
and we see the very source of his later artistic 
inspirations. 

Don't be fooled by the large edition; 
actually, this is quite a scarce book! This copy is 
#574 on Lafuma de Voiron paper of a total 
edition of 940. Skira 42. Print Quarterly IV, 
no. I, pp. 50-56. 

Cased in a fine, unique Stephanie Boyd 
handpainted leather felt-lined folding box, 
signed by boxmaster Boyd. Certificate included. 

$4,500 



MATERNITE 

Illustrations by 



/Kate (2 A 

Text by Marcel Arland 




84 



GALAXY 




THE BEST DOGON SCIENCE FICTION IN THE GALAXY 



From one the greatest science 
fiction writers of this century 
comes a classic tale .... 

Skulking Permit 

by Robert Sheckley 



with original illustrations by E.J. Gold 



Skulking Permit was published 
in a deluxe edition of 15 copies 
with original serigraph 
frontispiece by EJ. Gold, and 
many other original illustrations. 

In addition, 
5 serigraphs in a portfolio 
accompany this edition. 
Leather binding with 
marble end papers. 
Signed by the author and artist. 

$500 

PUBLISHED BY 

SIRIUS SCIENCE FICTION 



SIRIUS 



ADVERTISEMENT 



85 




Suppose that the historical Jesus and his 
disciples are an archetype of divine 
revelation which manifests in every period 
in history with another Jesus and another 
set of disciples. 

That is the premise which fuels this 
riveting novel by A.J. Langguth subtlely 
illustrated by E.J. Gold who worked with 
transparency and layering to evoke the 
otherworldly quality in this classic tale. 

This edition is limited to 125 copies. Deluxe, sewn 
hard-cover with signed and numbered frontispiece 
serigraph bound in, handsomely gold-embossed on 
cover and spine. Hors-texte edition also available. 
$175 regular edition. $225. with hors-texte serigraph. 



m CHRISTS 

by A J. LANGGUTH 




"Just as we had become accustomed to the 
fact that the only first-rate religious fiction 
today is being written by Norman Mailer, this 
mad novel comes along to surprise and 
enchant us. A comic religious novel? ... 
Impossible, but it has happened. It is either 
one of the canniest rejections of the Christian 
enterprise in our time, or one of the subtlest 
expressions of admiration for Jesus. Or both. 
Or neither...." 

- The New Republic 




86 



GALAX\ 

















ORIGINAL III US T RATIONS BY 
0, f- J GOLD A, io 



Forrest J Ackerman's collection of 
unforgettable stories from the 
childhood of science fiction in a 
special collectors' edition designed 
to last for generations. 

Available at $225.00. Lavishly illustrated. 



SENSE OF 

WONDER 

SCIENCE FICTION 



tUITLL) BY 

FORREST J ACKERMAN 



ADVANCE PUBLICATION INFORMATION 
CONTACT: Nancy Christie or Ivan Lourie 
(916) 477-1116 



ISBN: 0-89556-094-1 

$175.00 regular edition 
$225.00 with hors texte serigraph 
$125.00: $175.00(ht) pre-publication. 

• Date: February, 1993 
Edition Siza: Strictly limited to 225 copies 

Deluxe, sewn hard-cover with signed 
and numbered frontispiece serigraph 
bound in, handsomely gold-embossed 
on cover (with Forry Ackerman insignia) 
and on spine. 

Hors texts: Hors texts serigraph 
only tor copies 1-25, check with 
publisher for availability. 



RUS 



SENSE OF WONDER SCIENCE FICTION 

Edited and with Commentaries by Forrest J Ackerman 
Illustrated by E.J. Gold 

A note from Sirius Science Fiction Editor, Iven Lourie: “When I bought a house in an old neighborhood in 
Tucson, Arizona, in the seventies, my neighbors were an elderly couple who had lived there since the fifties. 

I found out that they had an immense paperback book collection, including science fiction. One day, as I sat 
in their musty living room talking with them about " the good old days. ” the woman brought out a paperback 
she handled carefully with great reverence, and insisted I must read. I did read it, and it did take my breath 
away at some scenes. That paperback was The Face in the Abyss by A. Merritt. I got the feeling that in the 
thirties or forties, when that came out, Merritt's work was tor young science fiction fans what cyberpunk is 
now, or what Ace doubles were when I was growing up." 

Forrest J Ackerman has gathered, with the original 1927 novella version of “The Face in the Abyss.” a collec- 
tion of unforgettable stories from the childhood of science fiction as the genre we know today— called then 
“sclenlifiction." as Forry explains. If Galaxy and Beyond and F & SF, the editorial work of Horace Gold and An- 
thony Boucher, were the coming-of-age of science fiction, these stories from the twenties and thirties, from 
such pulps as Amazing Stories and Science Wonder Stories, represent the first flush of the genre's youthful 
energy. They will truly awaken your “sense of wonder” as a reader, and remind you why you started reading 
science fiction in the first place, so many years ago— whether you've ever read these authors or not. I have 
to say, as I said to Forry in the early stages of working on this book, that I’ve never had more fun proof- read- 
ing anything in my career as a reader and editor. 

Forry, himself the senior statesman of science fiction editing and agentry. Is your ideal guide through this car- 
nival of adventure and astonishing Imaginative leaps. Many of the gems herein are definitely "in the rough." 



From SIRIUS SCIENCE FICTION 

SENSE OF WONDER 

Edited by Forrest J Ackerman 

Illustrated by EJ. Gold 



IRIU 



FORREST J 
ACKERMAN 



O 



M 

m 

u* 



2 ° 

Q§ 



ILLUSTRATED 

BY 

EJ. GOLD 








ADVERTISEMENT 



87 




E.J. (fold'f 

GUIDE TO THE GALAXY & 
BEYOND THE UNKNOWN 



E.J. Gold's Guide to the Galaxy and Beyond 
the Unknown is a small edition series of 
illustrated anthologies of some of Galaxy's 
editor E.J. Gold's favorite science fiction 
stories. Each story is accompanied by original 
illustrations by the artist / author E.J. Gold. 

The first two volumes include stories by 
giants such as Frederik Pohl, Robert Sheckley, 
Damon Knight, Daniel Galouye, Malcolm 
Jameson, Winston Marks, James E. Gunn, 
Theodore R. Cogswell and Frederic Brown. 
Gold reveals his love of fine books by the care 
he has taken in printing and binding this 
series. 





ADVANCE PUBLICATION INFORMATION 
Contact: Nancy Christia or Ivan Lourla 
(916)477-1116 



ISBN: 069556-102-6 

Price: SI 75.00 regular edition 

$225.00 with hors i 
S125.00: $175.00(14) pre-publication. 

$100.00; $150.00) hi) »ub*crbe< 

Releaee Date; February, 1993 

Edition SUe: Edition is strictly limited to 1 25 copies. 

Deluxe, sewn hard-cover limited edition with signed and nunOered 
frontispiece serigraph bound in, handsomely gold-embossed on 
cover and splno. 

Hors rente; Hors texts serigraph available only lor copies 1-25, sold 
out by subscription at time ol publication (check with Gateways 
tor avattbiiity). 



E.J. GOLD’S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY 
& BEYOND THE UNKNOWN (Volume Two) 

Gone to Hell in a Breadbasket 

Abandon Hope All Who Enter Here— So reads the notice posted over the entry portal in Dante s mtemo. 
For well over a two thousand years, both bolore and after the advent ol Christianity, the panorama of the Un- 
derworld and Its ruler, whether known aa Hades, Pluto, some other ancient name or The Devil, has been an 
inspiration to writers. Science fiction writers have been no exceptionl 

This second volume of EJ. Gold's Guido to the Galaxy... gathers together, for the first time anywhere, this 
handful of stories that so inspired the future author, arti6t and anthologist. Like those infamous and now highly 
archival collections August Derleth and Arldiam House put together some decades ago. this collection la 
bound to set a new standard for dark fantasy and gothic tales— re invoking the master authors on the sub|ect 
and revising the twentieth century history of magic Best of ail, the Illustrations provided by Gold are brand 
new and sizzling with energy, a perfect tribute to these writers ol the golden age ol science fiction. 

The stories in this anthology, second In the series edited by Gold, Include a classic novella on the science ol 
spells by James Gunn, who currently heads the Center for the Study ol Science Fiction at U. ol Kansas (see 
cover story and photo. Locus. September, 1 992) and one ol the most anthologized stories ol Theodore 
Cogswell, which treats brilliantly the science versus magic theme. From Malcolm Jameson comes an ar- 
chetypal story ol a hallucinatory night in Dante’s hell, while lesser-known Galaxy writer Winston Marks 
provides a memorable black-magic detective story. Science fiction wizard Fredric Brown (like Cogswell. 
Jameson and Marks, now deceased) supplies the volume's "chaser" with two potent short- shorts published 
together In Galaxy as "Double Whammy." 

This Is a collection ol classics rescued from paperback oblivion, reprinted In the dual-column layout ol the fif- 
ties magazines It Is a must lor collectors— an Instant collectible and heirloom— that Sirius science fiction ’fans 
will want to read and treasure on their shelves for years to come. 




Voluma Two cbntbnts; 
Not According to Panto 
I'd Glum a Dollar . 



. 



!£ 


Slrte ot the Magua ... 


t:Uf 


Double Whammy 





rim Ja m eaor t •»#«* **! ?» 2 







PUBLICATION INFORMATION 
CONTACT: NANCY CHRISTIE OR IVEN LOURIE 
(916) 477-1116 

ISBN: 0-69556-101-8 (Volume One) 

Price: $175.00; $225.00 with hors lexle 

Ed Hion Sizt: Edition Is strictly limited to 125 copies. 

Deluxe, sewn hard-covei limited edition with signed and 
numbered frontispiece serigraph bound in. handsomely 
gold-embossed on cover and spine. 

Hors teste: Hors lexle serigraph available only only lor copies 1-25. 



WOW I Whatta book! What a clever title! 
Whatta giftl What unusual artwork! 

—Forrest J Ackerman 



E.J. GOLD’S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY 
& BEYOND THE UNKNOWN 



(Volume One) 






Gateways Is proud to announce a new series of publications In the area of SIRIUS 

science fiction. Writers will Include everyone you've heard of and admired— 
all the science fiction greats. 

Fulfilling a decades-old dream. E.J. Gold, artist, author and composer has assembled, In several 
volumes — the first of which is scheduled for upcoming release — stories which left the strongest im- 
pression on him during the years he spent devouring uncountable manuscripts submitted to his 
father H.L. Gold, the editor of Galaxy Magazine. 

With this Incomparable background In science fiction, and over five million words of his own in pnnt, 
Gold is probably one of the most qualified editors in the Solar System for this senes, and it is with 
sheer delight that he has gathered some of the best stories ever written by some of the greatest 
writers in the field. 

One of the more exciting aspects ol this project is that Gold also illustrates these stories with 
original drawings. Never before ha9 an anthology or an individual title been edited and Illustrated by 
the same person equally recognized as a world-class writer, artist and editor. 

All ot the stories to be Included are archelypes ot their genre. They alternately portray expanded 
realities, time-travel, technological magic, intra-species communication, alternate worlds and a host 
of other mind-expanding themes but in extremely unusual ways. 

These volumes are sure to become the staple for an entire new generation ot science fiction 
readers— and the definitive collections for future generations ot tans.The stories and magazines 
published In the early days ot Science Fiction, the 20’s and 30’s, are now extremely rare and collec- 
tible. With the classics ot the 50’s and 60 s— why wait fifty or one hundred yearn in the future to 
look lor these stones? Collect them now, in Sirius Science Fiction Editions! You can enjoy them for 
years to come— then pass them on to your children and grandchildren 



Volume One contents: - 




br^mbi 



With the publication of E .J. Gold's Guide to the Galaxy and Beyond the Unknown great out-of-print 
classics, thematic anthologies and noteworthy science fiction titles are introduced to a new 
generation of readers for their lasting enjoyment. Published by Sirius Science Fiction. The best 
dogon fiction in the galaxy. $225.00 regular edition. Available also by subscription at $175. per 
volume. Order now at 1-800-869-0658. 








88 



GALAXY 




Matisse, Henri Pierre a Feu 
86,(4)pp. 

This beautiful little book features 
two original works on paper; they 
are portraits of women: 1 original 
linocut and 1 original lithograph by 
Matisse, both printed in black; also a 
lithographic frontispiece of the 
Firebird printed in blue after a 
drawing by Matisse. 14 heliogravure 
plates in text reproducing drawings 
by Matisse. 4to. Dec. wraps. With 
bound-in wraps printed in 5-color 
pochoir with a design by Matisse 
especially made for this publication. 
Rebound in fine leather, 5 raised 
bands, gold embossed, designed by 
E.J. Gold. 

Lithography was by the Mourlot 
brothers. Texts by Aragon, Eluard, 
Callois, Lely, Char, Spyridaki, 
Marchand, Hugnet, Jaguer, Solier, 
Kober and others. 

Published as an homage to 
Matisse. 

Ref: Dutuit 1 7 

Paris; Maeght editor, 1947; #912 
of 950 limited edition (there were 
999 printed in all, including proofs, 
on velin superieur, a wonderful 
paper that, at least in this copy, has 
aged well.) 

$ 12,500 



Maillol, Aristide: Les Pastorales 

de Longus ou Daphnis et Chloe. 

Version d'Amyot, revue et 
completee par P.L. Courier. Bois 
originaux d' Aristide Maillol. (Paris: 
Gonin,) 1937. 

Two volumes: Bound: loose in 
original wrappers, publisher's 
chemises & slipcases. 

This is copy no. I — the editor's 
copy — on Maillol paper with an 
original pencil-drawing on transfer 
tissue. The sketch is pencil-signed 
by Maillol with his initial "M", and 
it is significant that the drawing is 
further labeled by the 
editor-publisher, Philippe Gonin. 



There were 6 proofs, two sets of 
woodcuts pulled in black and in 
sanguine. 500 copies on Maillol 
paper, plus 25 or more copies 
produced hors commerce (not for 
sale). The interior page size is about 
8 1/2" x 5 1/4". 

This copy is numbered with 
Roman numeral "I", not Arabic "1" 
— with two additional suites of 
woodcuts, one in black and one in 
sanguine, not called for and signed 
by the publisher, Gonin. 

See: The Artist and the Book, 
174 

Garvey & Wick, 22 

Wheeler, 131 

This is a very important and 
perhaps unique example, as it is the 
publisher's own copy. We doubt 
there is another like it, and would 
dearly love to know of something 
similar. 

Encased in a fabulous handmade 
leather felt-lined folding box, 
handpainted by E.J. Gold, and 
signed by the artist. Embossed 
certificate from H.E.I. 

$ 12,500 



Chagall, Marc: Illustrations for 

The Bible. (Verve # 33-34) AND 
Drawings for the Bible. (Verve # 
37-38) Two volumes. Folio, original 
boards. Paris, Editions de la Revue 
Verve: 1956, 1960. 

Fine and nicely matched copies of 
the First and Only issue of Chagall's 
illustrations for this Bible which 
documents and complements the 
edition of the Bible published by 
Teriade in 1956. 

These two volumes contain a total 
of 40 original color lithographs. 
Unfortunately, most sets of this 
work have been plundered for plates 
by print dealers. Complete sets in 
such good condition are becoming 
exceedingly difficult to locate. 

2 volumes encased in a highly 
unusual leather felt-lined folding 
box, handpainted by boxmaster 
Stephanie Boyd. 



Extraordinary and unique 
combination of publisher's and 
boxmaster's art; the one-of-a-kind 
box is signed by the artist. With 
embossed Certificate from H.E.I. 

$ 14,500 



Maillol, Aristide, Virgile. Les 
Georgiques . Texte Latin et version 
franfaise de l'Abbe Jacques Delille, 
gravures sur bois d 'Aristide Maillol. 
Paris, Philippe Gonin, 1937-43 
(1950). 2 vols. 4to. (2), 174, (2); (2), 
154, (2) pp. including 122 woodcuts, 
of which some are illustrated initial 
letters. 

Unsewn, as issued, in publisher's 
cream wrappers, preserved in 
quarter vellum slipcase and chemise. 
With the prospectus for the work, 
loosely inserted. 

One of a limited edition of 750 
copies printed on rag-wove paper, 
watermarked with Maillol's "seated 
nude". 

Maillol began the first drawings 
for this project in 1908 when, 
returning from a trip to Greece with 
Count Harry Kessler of the Cranach 
Press, he stopped over at Naples and 
Pompeii. 

Over the next three decades, he 
added a few more cuts to the 
original work and in 1937 Gonin 
urged him to resume the project; the 
final block was delivered just before 
the artist died. 

Maillol's eyesight was poor 
during the last years of his life, so 
the actual cutting for the project was 
executed by craftsmen working from 
the artist's sketches made directly on 
the print surface of the wood block. 

See: Artist & Book p. 175 This 
copy is no. 472/750. 

Encased in an elaborate and 
completely unique leather felt-lined 
folding box, handpainted by E.J. 
Gold. Box is signed by the artist. 
With embossed Certificate from 
H.E.I. $7,500 



ADVERTISEMENT 



89 





MOONDOG • An inspiration to American 
composers for many years, Moondog pioneered 
electronic, layered sounds - using one 
Amdek. Brilliant stuff! $15.98 



The Benedictine Monks of Santo Domingo de Silos: 
CHANT • It's been over 400 years since the 
Benedictines had a chart-topping album! It doesn't 
qet any better than this. Listen! 

$15.98 



Yma Sumac • The enchanting sounds of the 
Peruvian Princess of the Catskills. A legendary 
vocalist. $15.98 



"Maybe you can help me out. The CD's looked great in 
their nifty plastic cases, and you can see that they're real 
Space Age Technology. But is there a special tool for 
removing these things so that they can be played?" 

CZ Scottsdale AZ 

"I have wanted an Yma Sumac record for years, but did- 
n't know it until I saw your ad and saw how terribly 
expensive they are. Fortunately, I can get it used at my 
local CD Shop for half the price. Thanks for the tip!" 

TV, Fort Wayne IN 
"I ordered several CD's about a year ago and never 
received them. I have called you hundreds of times to get 
a refund, but I wrote this final letter to let you know that 
I discovered that I actually ordered them from a different 
store. Please do better in the future." 

TK, Spokane WA 



*ARG4|jv .1 T 

1UIF THE 
PRICE! 



TO ORDER CALL: 
1 - 800 - 869-0658 
916 - 432-1716 

PO BOX 370 
EVADA CITY CA 95959 
USE THE HANDY ORDER 
FORM ON PAGE 90 



Stan Freberg • The sensitive, touch- 
ing songs of a satiric master. A mas- 
ter advertising concept man sings his 
heart out! $15.98 



UNION LABEL 



1111 



^ ■ fl m rc r yi r : rrr«r 



w 

A 

V 

E 

F 

O 

R 

M 





; 7/ 



Fine silver, ceramic bead, leather cord. 
Each is unique to a certain moment. 
Send birthdate or other personal information. 
$49 plus $3 shipping and handling. 

iiei eartheuworks 

PO BOX 370 NEVADA CITY CA 93959 
916-432-1716 or 1-800-869-0658 



Sizes M-XXL white on black (shown) or black on white. 
Specify color & size. CA residents add 7.25% tax. 
Send check or M.O. to: 







po box 794 penn valley California 95946 
1-800-887-8536 • 916-432-9004 






90 



GALAXY 



Q&I&Xy ORDER FORM 

JUST FILL OUT THIS ORDER FORM AND MAIL IT (OR A XEROX COPY) ALONG 
WITH YOUR PAYMENT (make checks payable to GALAXY MAGAZINE) 
GALAXY • MAIL ORDER DEPARTMENT • P.O. BOX 370 NEVADA CITY CA 95959 



Name 



Address 



City_ 



State 



- Zi P- 



Day Phone_ 



Charge to my 
Card# 



Visa 



_Mastercard 
Exp Date_ 



Signature ( required for charge orders) 

The above signed individual certifies him/herself to be responsible 
assignee for the above credit card number and authorizes GALAXY 
to charge this account for the full amount of this sale as specified on 
this form. 



CREDIT CARD ORDERS ONLY: FOR FASTEST SERVICE COPY THIS SHEET AND 
FAX IT TO OUR 24-HOUR ORDER LINE: 

FAX# (916) 432-1810 

BE SURE TO ENTER YOUR NAME AS IT APPEARS ON YOUR CARD AND SIGN ABOVE WHERE INDICATED 



(Please allow 3-4 weeks for delivery when sending personal checks. For fastest delivery send monev order or charge to 
your VISA or Mastercard) SATISFACTION GUARANTEED: If you are dissatisfied with your 
merchandise when you receive it , simply return it to us in good condition, with the original packaging 
and a copy of your invoice and you will receive a full credit or refund, as you request. 



HOW MANY 


ITEM # 


PAGE # 


NAME OR DESCRIPTION 


EACH 


TOTAL 










































































































1 










CALL FOR SHIPPING CHARGES 

1-800-869-0658 or 916432-1716 
n ii nr l l 




MERCHANDISE TOTAL 






SHIPPING CHARGES 






v^an ioaay: 
Be a Galaxian! 




7.25% SALES TAX (CA ONLY) 








TOTAL ENCLOSED 










ADVERTISEMENT 



91 




THE LEGEND RETURNS 



GALAXY Magazine, piloted by Editor E. J. Gold, is published six 
times per year. Available at $2.50 for a single copy ($3.50 in Canada), 
GALAXY subscriptions are $18 for U.S. Bulk Rate, $22 for U.S. First Class, 
$28 for Canada, $30 for Great Britain/Europe, and $32 for the Pacific Rim. 

With your subscription, you get a Free Galaxian Button, a $2 value. 
GALAXIAN Buttons are available separately for $2 each plus $1 shipping 
and handling. 

Your subscription will begin with the current issue. Subscribers will be 
given preference for back issue orders. 

A limited number of Volume I, Number 1 have been put aside as single 
issue samples @ $2. 50/copy plus $1 First Class shipping and handling. Offer 
good only while supplies last! 



Contact: 

GALAXY MAGAZINE 

P.O. Box 370 




92 



GALAXY 




A new Painting Series by E. J. Gold 
Modeled by Catherine Oxenberg 

Available from liei 

1-800-869-0658 • 916-432-1839 
P.O. BOX 370 NEVADA CITY CA 95959 



Catherine the Great 



ADVERTISEMENT 



93 




MIRACLE 

PUPPETS 



6- \j6s\Xt%y 
<0^ 4hjYV44*/lA>Q\*sl, 



£ ac £ 

owy* fsMht, A *b/^pC 

/kjt&iy i^cloM^ 
4y+jfraJL fcu/tA*. 
K^JUUt Af« ^<u^L 

EliU, Te*l, 

Pwxflt, AyU EU*k. 



Miracle Dragon: $95 

shipping included. 
California residents 
please add $6.90 tax. 
Send check or M.O. to 

FACETS 

PO BOX 443 
Penn Valley, CA 95946 
1-800-887-8536 
(916) 432-9278 
Allow 4-6 weeks 
for delivery. 



94 



GALAXY 




We're very proud of 
these ceramic pieces. In 
look, feel and presence, 
they are truly exquisite. 
We think you'll agree with 
us - but in the unlikely 
event that you don't, we 
guarantee your satisfac- 
tion - your money will be 
refunded in full. 



imagine their delight • •• 



Endless Circle Teapots 



PHI, Necklace 
Hand-forged silver 
Hand-made ceramtc beads 
$249 



&D0 5101 

Oval serving platter 
14" long $225 



DG20546 11" Pitcher 
$225 



DG20645 
17" Umbrella Stand 

$350 



CP31006 7" Egg Box $125 



1-800-869-0658 or 916-432-1716 
PO Box 370 Nevada City CA 95959 



EC05001 Endless Circle Teapot and 
cups. Specify one color: Blue, Brown, 
Yellow. Red & Green not shown 

$275 




ADVERTISEMENT 



95 



ANNOUNCING 



NEW WORK by 
JACQUELINE LICHTENBERG: 

— □ B OXMASTER □ — 




For More Information on this and 
other Galaxy Classic Titles, 

Call 1-800-869-0658 or 916-432-1716 
Galaxy Classics 
PO Box 370 
Nevada City CA 95959 



Featuring Illustrations 
by 

Hannah M. G. Shapero 

Edition Maximum, 250 

• 

These are Collectible, 
Hand-Made Books! 

• 

Hand-Bound Edition 
Gold Stamped Cover 
Hand-pulled Serigraph Frontispiece 
Signed by Author and Artist 

French End papers 

• 

$175 

Pre-Publication: $125 

• 

Reserve your copy now! 
This one will go fast! 

Published by 
Sirius Science Fiction 
Presented by Galaxy Classics 



SIRIUS 



Galax y 

CIA66IC5 



5TER 

BY JREDUELME LICH1EI1BEFIE 



GALAXY MAGAZINE NON-PROFIT ORG 

IDHHB, Inc ' U.S. POSTAGE PAID 

PO Box 370 PERMIT #2421 

Nevada City. CA 95959 SACRAMENTO, CA 



"INSTANT CLASSIC" is not an oxymoron, like Jumbo 

Shrimp'. It is the only way to describe these works from Galaxy Classics 
- limited edition, hand-crafted works of art, many signed by both author 
and artist, and available in strictly limited editions. The finest works by 
the grand masters of the field, in lavishly illustrated, hand-sewn books to 
treasure for a lifetime, and more. 



jSP 



Galaxy 

CLASSICS 



A. SENSE OF WONDER 
SCIENCE FICTION 
Edited by Forrest J Ackerman 
Illustrated by E.J. Gold 

Forrest J Ackerman's collection of unforget- 
table stories from the childhood of science fic- 
tion. 

SF1410 $175 

SF1410SER w / hors texte $225 

B. E.J. GOLD S 
GUIDE TO THE GALAXY 

& BEYOND THE UNKNOWN 
VOLUMES 1-8 
Illustrated by E. J. Gold 
Classic stories portraying the archetypes of the 
genre. Expanded realities, time-travel, techno- 
logical magic, intraspecies communication, 
alternate worlds, and a host of other mind- 
expanding themes. 

Volume ItSFOOl $175 

Volume 1:SF001SER w/hors texte — $225 



A. 




B. 




C. SKULKING PERMIT 
by Robert Sheckley 
Illustrated by E.J. Gold 

A colony cut off from Earth's civilization is sud- 
denly scheduled for a military inspection. A mas- 
terfully ironic and visionary tale. Edition of 15 
only. 

SF004 — CALL! for availability & price. 

D. JESUS CHRISTS 
by A.J. Langguth 
Illustrated by E.J. Gold 

This amazing book — out of print for many 
years — tells of different Christs living in different 
times. 

"...this mad novel comes along to surprise and 
enchant us. A comic religious novel? Impossible, 
but it has happened. It is either one of the canniest 
rejections of the Christian enterprise in our time, 
or one of the subtlest expressions of admiration 
for Jesus..." 

The New Republic, 1965 
SF009 $175 

-$225 





jal 


'^1 

1 f Tv- v,vv» | 

k * [ 






D. 




SF009SER w / hors texte- 



"Besides bringing back forgotten classics, these art edtions are gor- 
geous works of art and also fine examples of the bookbinder's craft. 
This is your chance to get in on the start of another Arkham House!" 

Robert Sheckley 



CALL FOR INFORMATION ON SUBSCRIPTION RATES FOR THE WHOLE 
EIGHT VOLUME SET OF GOLD'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY, 

COMNG SOON: NEW WORK BY ROBERT SHECKLEY & JACQUELINE LICHTENBERG 
PLEASE CALL FOR MORE INFORMATION 

1 - 800 - 869-0658 ( 916 ) 432-1716