SPECIAL GALAXY IS BACK'CELEBRATIO 
FEATURING MORE BETTER AND LARGER 



VOLUME 40 NUMBER 1 



IN THE DAYS OF 
THE STEAM 
WARS 

An Exciting New 
Illustrated Series 

MICHAEL 

KALUTA: 

FANTASY 

ARTIST 

ELECTRONIC 

LIFESTYLE 

Science by Steve 
North 

IN THE SHUBBI 
ARMS 

By Steven Utley & 
Howard Waldrop 

AMERICAN 
BOOK AWARD 
WINNER 
JEM - PART 5 

by Frederik Pohl 






Editorial 



Oh, No! 
They've 
Changed It! 



SPtCUL GALAXY IS BACK CEtEBR'MIOS <0.^ 

>v<» 



ELAU RIS(. MORF Bt TTLR ANDLARGER 

eauxy 



VOLUME 40 NUMBER 1 



IN IHE DAVSOF 
THE STEAM 
WARS 

'll I \< iliiu; Svtt 

Illllstr.ltrd 'UTICS 



MICHAEL 

KALUTA: 

FANTASY 

ARTIST 

ELECTRONIC 

IIFESTYLE 

Si h I)i>-|i\ 

Virth 

IN THE SHUBBI 
ARMS 

U\ st. \.-n L lli-\ 
f W,il<lrii|i 

AMt RICAN 
BOOK AW ARO 
WINNER 
JEM - PARI T 

In I (.‘(l.MiLl’i.hl 




W HAT WOULD YOU say if I 
told you that terrorists broke 
into editorial offices of Galaxy 
and demanded that we en- 
large the magazine, radically alter the 
page design, and add more graphics and 
visual materials? Won’t buy it, huh? I 
was afraid of that. 

Okay, 1 admit it. The new management 
of Galaxy has been tinkering with the 
design and content of a thirty-year-old 
publication. I didn’t want to admit it at 
first because the overwhelming reaction of 
regular readers to any change in their 
magazine is bound to be negative. 1 
guess this is the place for me to explain 
what is going on here. 

To those of you who w'ere very attached 
to the digest size, and especially to those 
of you facing the prospect of building new 



bookshelves just to hold your copies of 
Galaxy. 1 offer my apologies. But I want 
to point out that it’s time to bid the 
digest-sized science-fiction magazine 
good-bye. It is no longer necessary. 
Science fiction is respectable now and you 
don’t have to hide your magazine inside 
a library book to read it. A larger 
magazine has a better chance of 
attracting the notice of the casual reader 
when it goes out for sale. If we can get 
more casual readers in here, we might 
entice some to stay for a while and become 
serious readers, thus contributing to the 
health of science fiction in general and 
Galaxy in particular. 

As a matter of fact, you will notice as 
you page through the new Galaxy that 
most of the changes are there for 
attracting new readers. This doesn’t 



mean that we are going to change it from 
a special interest publication to a mass 
consumer item. We think we have found 
design and editorial concepts which will 
open Galaxy up to a wider readership and 
still preserve the special interest ele- 
ments which we all know and love. 

Remember the Galaxy cover design 
from a generation ago? They used to call 
it the “inverted L.” We are using a cover 
design which is very similar to the old 
inverted L. which we have always regar- 
ded as a classy design. We have also 
brought back the typeface used in the 
original Galaxy logo from thirty years ago. 
In this issue you will also find an adver- 
tisement written by Galaxy's famous first 
editor, H.L. Gold. Thirty years later, it 
reads not so much like an advertisement 
as an editorial comment. You can trust us 
to follow that commitment. 

Not all of our changes look to Galaxy’s 
golden past, however. Let me enumerate 
the things we are doing which are brand 
new (not just for Galaxy, but in some 
cases for science fiction publishing as a 
whole). 

Change Number One: The Modules. 
Readers generally fall into one of two 
groups; dippers and diggers. Dippers 
page through a magazine and pick out 
things that interest them, reading here 
and there as they feel like it. Diggers get 
hold of an article and read it right through 
to the very end, sometimes demanding 
footnotes and suggestions for additional 
reading. Every magazine editor faces the 
basic problem of catering to both the 
dippers and the diggers, the classic 
problem of supplying both substance and 
variety. We have a brand new approach 
to this problem: reading modules. Each 
issue of Galaxy has two feature articles 
(one on scienee and one about science 
fiction) and six to ten modules. The 
modules are short items and each one is 



Contents 

Volume 40, Number 1 



SCIENCE 

SON OF CALCULATOR AND THE 
ELECTRONIC LIFESTYLE 

by Steve North 6 

Personal computing has been in your 
future for some time now. Here’s what it 
will mean when it finally arrives. 

Movers and Shakers 7 

A man who is making the microcomputer 
industry grow up. 




YOUR CAR AND ITS COMPUTER 

by Ed Teja 10 

The car of the future might take as much 
direction from its computer as from its 
driver. 

Words 10 

The language of computing and how to 
use it. 

Careers 16 

Get yourself ready to grow with the 
personal computer industry’. 




IF YOU DON’T TALK TO YOUR 
STEREO, I WILL 

by Eric Blair 12 

Galaxy takes a look at tomorrow’s 
computer-controlled, voice actuated en- 
tertainment systems — and what to expect 
next. 

DEFENDING THE E.MPIRE 

by Ed Teja 12 

Game playing >eads to a lot of solutions to 
real-’® orid pr-irjeirs — it’s also fun. 




FAMOUS EVENTS OF THE FUTURE 



THE JOVIAN SKI PARTY 




On December 16th, 2017, two dozen members of the group "Children of Liberty" (a political action 
organization of Europan radicals) seized the Jupiter Company's flagship HOLST and, without proper 
authorization, jettisoned four tons of alpine and nordic skiing equipment into Jovian space. The “Party” was a 
protest against the massive tax burden placed on so-called "luxuries" bound for Eurpoa, Ganymede and 
other Jovian moons. The colonials, infuriated by what they considered unfair taxation (with no corresponding 
representation on either the board of the Jupiter Company or Earth's U.N. Security Council), boarded the 
HCLST disguised as aboriginal natives of pre-technological North America, although they didn't really fool 
anybody for a second. 



Science-fiction, right? Wrong. It could be future history, especially if the United Nation’s Agreement on the 
Moon and other Celestial Bodies is signed in itspresent murky form. As it stands, the Agreement mandates the 
establishment of a new multi-national Regime with jurisdiction over the entire solar system. It effectively bans 
private enterprise from outer space, and requires a// activities in space to be under the control of an OPEC-like 
Earth monopoly. If the human race is to avoid the mistakes of the past, human and political freedoms must be 
assured off-planet. The time to start is now, and the way to begin is to learn the facts. Why are we interested in 
this? We’re the L-5 Society, and we’re going. Join us. Write: 

The L-5 Society 
1620 North Park 
Tucson, Arizona 85719. 




written specifically to complement one of 
the longer feature articles. If you are a 
digger, you can get hold of the feature 
and follow it right through as usual, but 
the modules will pop up along the way 
and they will seem to you to be a lot like 
footnotes. If you are a dipper, on the 
other hand, you can skim the feature for 
the material of interest to you and at the 
same time, you wilt get a lot of little 
interesting items along the way. Each of 
the smaller items is complete by itself 
and reads like a short article. 

Change Number Two: The Strataform 
Page. Don’t you just love the word 
“strataform”? We decided that was the 
best word to describe the page design, 
which comprises three bands, or strata. 
The design is necessary to accomodate 
the modules in a way which will not 
threaten the peace of mind of the diggers. 
A feature article most often occupies the 
center stratum and it stays there page 
after page. Very predictable. The 
modules spring up along the way in the 
other strata, wherever they seem to be 
relevant. We are adding special lines to 
the design which will help your eye stay 
put where you want it to. but which will 
also tell you when an illustration supports 
material in two different strata at the 
same time. Yes. it might take an issue or 
two for you to get used to it, but you will 
ultimately find that you like it better than 
conventional page design, whether you 
dig or dip. It realizes science fiction’s two 
important goals: to be rational and pre- 
dictable while being full of surprises. 

Change Number Three: Graphics and 
Visual Material. The new Galaxy has 
more pictures than it ever did. We are 
not substituting pictures for text, but we 
think pictures can be a very important part 
of your understanding. And as I noted 
above, we are placing the pictures in a way 
that makes their relevance immediately 



apparent. In addition, we are able to use 
the new page design to great effect in the 
illustration of the fiction. Each story has 
at least one illustration to go with it. We 
are allowing the artists to design the illus- 
tration pages themselves, within the 
established page grid. This approach has 
a couple of advantages: it makes the 

pictures interesting, since they are 
shaped to emphasize the subject, and it 
keeps the artists happy. 

Change Number Four: Content. I 

already mentioned our feature articles. 
Science editor Ed Teja and I are doing a 
lot of searching and planning to make 
sure that Galaxy brings the future into 
your lives in many ways. In addition to a 
new emphasis on non-fiction, you will 
notice changes in the fiction as well. The 
most dramatic change is that it is all 
pretty short. We are breaking Galaxy’s 
long-established policy of serializing 
longer works. We would like to hear from 
the readers on this subject, but I have a 
feeling that most of you will prefer 
getting almost all short fiction. It gives us 
flexibility and variety. Magazine editors 
know that it is easy to fill an issue (or a 
run of issues) by serializing a novel. On 
the other hand, the structure of 
the new Galaxy calls for building, rather 
than filling, each issue. The short stories 
you find in these pages are selected, not 
only for their quality, but for the specific 
mix they provide in tone, subject, and 
mood. 

So there you have it. Galaxy is a new 
magazine now. Each issue is crafted 
around the three concepts of science, 
science fiction, and science fiction 
commentary. Within each department 
you will find both unity and diversity, 
both depth and variety, and a com- 
mitment to the future. Welcome to a new 
era. 

-Floyd Kemske 



Galaxy 



STAFF 
EDITOR 
Floyd Kemske 
PUBLISHER 
Vincent McCaffrey 
SCIENCE EDITOR 
Ed Teja 

REVIEW EDITOR 
Noralie Barnett 
CONSULTANTS 
William Desmond 
Thomas Owen 
Charles C. Ryan 
Andrew A. Whyte 
CONTRIBUTING EDITORS 
Eric Blair 
Eugene Potter 
CIRCULATION DIRECTOR 
Carol Kalish 
PRODUCTION STAFF 
Letty Hummel 
Kathy Romer 
D.M. Rowles 
Claire M. Sasahara 
Michael Wiskind 
Jim Zaccaria 
Thais Cobum 
Tvgg Feet 
ARTWORK 
Tom Barrett 
Larry Blamire 
Michael Kaluta 
Barclay Shaw 
Cortnev Skinner 

ADVERTISING REPRESENTATIVE 
Jim Griner 

Galaxy Magazine is published bimonthly in 
February. April, June, August. October, and 
December. During 1980, the magazine is observing a 
more limited schedule and is appearing in May, July, 
October, and December. Editorial and advertising 
offices; 339 Newbury Street, Boston, MA 02115. 
Single copy price: $1.50. Subscriptions: $7.50 for 6 
issues. $12 for 12 issues. This issue published July, 
1980. All characters and settings contained in stories 
are purely fictional. Factual accuracy of nonfiction 
articles is the responsibility of the author. No 
responsibility is assumed for unsolicited manuscripts 
or artwork, but all submissions are welcome, no 
query necessary. All submissions must contain a 
self-addressed, stamped envelope sufficient for 
return or they will be ritually burned by the office 
staff. Second Class Postage Paid at Boston. MA. 

Copyright 1980 © by Galaxy Magazine. Inc. 




FICTION 



IN THE SHUBBI ARMS 

by Steven Utley and Howard Waldrop. 18 

Conquerers come and go, but some 
things just never change. 

THE COLONY 

by Raymond Kaminski 20 

The Exploratory Program reaches the 
fringes of the solar system and finds a 
derelict spacecraft. 




THE NIGHT MACHINE 

by Dona Vaughn 24 

They wouldn’t have brought him back to 
Earth at all if they had thought he would 
live through it. 

IN THE DAYS OF THE STEAM WARS 
by Eugene Potter and Larry Blamire . 28 

The crew of the Javelin never expected to 
be outclassed by an invading steamrig 
from Normandy. 




JEM, PART 5 

by Frederik Pohl 40 

Who ever would have thought that Jem 
would outlast the Earth? Suddenly, this 
godforsaken planet has become much 
more important. 

POEM 

MAPPING THE ISLAND IN IMAGES 

by Robert Frazier 58 

Some day, we will call space “home.” 



3 







,SBACK'« 

BtTTfcR 






,uousi^ 



>*• 






HOION 









"““' "‘' ii’llM 



NUMBtR 



\OLU^'t 



yrftt\wi« »«* 
(Oinu’o^ 



SK\i 

rANlAS' 



sn-v*' 



sh^R®' 



Galaxy 
is back. 



. and to say it's bigger and better than ever 
seems pale compared with our enthusiasm. 
We have increased the size from traditional 
digest to the more dramatic 'Galileo' size, but 
we've gone back to the cover design Galaxy 
made famous in the 1950's. We've enlarged 
the editorial scope with an aggressive science 
department covering areas like personal 
computing, jobs of the future and how to 
prepare for them, the young movers and 
shakers who are inventing our future right 
now, and 'Question' — probing the problems 
before they happen. 

Splendid illustration and graphics enhance 
the kind of original Science Fiction which 
made Galaxy the most popular publication in 
the field from the time it was born 30 years 
ago. And we're putting all this in a radically 
new format inside, unlike any magazine 
you've ever seen before, because Galaxy is 
not only a magazine ABOUT the future. 
Galaxy is the magazine OF the future. 



And we have a special offer for those who 
want to rediscover the magazine which set 
the standard for Science Fiction. In 1980, 
every subscriber will receive the Gala 30th 
Anniversary triple issue, featuring some of 
the greatest authors in Science Fiction, cover 
priced at $3.95, at no extra cost. 



Use this coupon to get the next five regular 
issues of Galaxy plus our fantastic 30th 
Anniversary triple issue for only $7.50. 
Subscribe today and don't miss an issue of 
the new Galaxy. 

□ $7.50 for 6 issues (includes triple issue). 

□ $12 for 12 issues, discount price 
(includes triple issue) 

Name. 

Street 

Town 

State Zip 

Send coupon and check to: Galaxy 
339 Newbury St., Boston, MA02115 

I 





You'll Never 
Find It 
in Galaxy 




galaxy 

SCIENCE flCTlOK 



OCfOSi* 1950 

25 < 



YOU'LL NEVER SEE IT 



IN GALAXY 



el Bblllinoi, a t.ny plnnc voen billien 
li^bl jeofi (fem iel. H* ext tu' hii 
suptr-bypO'drIxe fe< tht Ian4in9 and 
gl iKei point, a tall, loan tpotemiin 
5t«pp«d out el the tail nswmbly. ptolon. 
jun-blattet in a ipnie-tannod hand. 

Cti be<k from thoit (ontrolt, Bat 
Outsion. the tell ttronpe lipptd Ihinly. 

Eou don't bnaw it, but this it your last 



galloping down through lh« noirow 
past at Ingle Cwl<ti, a tiny gold tolony 

spvi'od hold for a lew overhang el luit- 

wrangler stepped out from behind a 
high boulder, lii-thooler in a sun- 
■onncd hand. 

"Bear bach and disineunt. Bat 
Qurston,” the tall stronger kppecl thinly, 
"fov don't knew it, but this it your Iasi 
laddle-jaunl through these here porls." 



1IM! aUAHItt- * Susprmr Nortl 8y CWtorJ D. SimoS 
CONtJSI-SWgniNG PmZSS-lnt«!iii«i! lyWnUf tl» 



The first issue of Galaxy appeared in 
October. 1950, and sold for twenty-five 
cents. Assembled by the legendary H.L. 
Gold, this first issue had a radically new 
cover design and 160 pages of outstan- 
ding fiction, features, and articles. The 
back cover was an advertisement, written 
by Editor Gold, titled "You'll Never See 
It In Galaxy." We are running this 
famous ad in lieu of a letters column for 
this issue. 



Sound alike? They should — one is merely a western transplanted 
to an alien and impossible planet. If this is your idea of science 
fiction, you’re welcome to it. YOU’LL NEVER FIND IT IN GALAXYl 
What you will find in Galaxy is the finest possible science 
fiction... authentic, plausible, thoughtful. .written by authors who 
do not automatically switch over from crime waves to Earth 
invasions; by people who know and love science fiction ... for people 
who know and love it. 



Jets blasting. Bat Durston came 
screeching down through the atmosphere 
of Bblizznaj, a tiny planet seven billion 
light years from Sol. He eut out his 
super-hypcr-drive for the landing. .and 
at that point, a tall, lean spaeeman 
stepped out of the tail assembly, proton 
gun-blaster in a space-tanned hand. 

“Get back from those controls. Bat 
Durston." the tall stranger lipped thinly. 
“You don’t know it. but this is your last 
spaee trip.” 



Hoofs drumming. Bat Durston came 
galloping down through the narrow pass 
at Eagle Gulch, a tiny gold colony 400 
miles north of Tombstone. He spurred 
hard for a low overhang of rimrock . and 
at that point a tall, lean wrangler stepped 
out from behind a high boulder, 
six-shooter in a sun-tanned hand. 

“Rear back and dismount, Bat 
Durston.” the tall stranger lipped thinly. 
“You don’t know it. but this is your last 
saddle-jaunt through these here parts.” 




COMMENTARY 



MICHAEL KALUTA: STORYTELLING 
FANTASY ARTIST 

by Floyd Kemske 62 

The artist responsible for The Shadow 
comic book has an unusual way of looking 
at life and his art. He believes it is not 
enough for a picture to look good. It has 
to tell a story, too. In this interview, he 
talks about his work, his philosophy, his 
colleagues in the art world, and his vision 




Potter on Books 62 

Potter gets off to a shaky start. He says 
he doesn’t know anything about art, but 
he goes ahead and reviews an art book, 
anyway. 

Pages from the Sketchbook of Michael 

K^uta 63, 66, 68 

Michael Kaluta carries not one, but two 
sketchbooks with him wherever he goes. 
Working in them is what he likes to do 
best. 




PROJECTIONS 

by Robert Stewart 66 

Our film department describes the 
making of a classic. 

REVIEWS 

edited by Noralie Barnett 60 

Books. We get books. 

Galaxative be 



Our back cover seems to need a front 
cover, with apologies to Michael Kaluta. 





BOOKS«FILMS*TELEVISION*MAGAZINES*RECORDS*GAMES*FANZINES*RADIO»PHDTOGAPHY*ART*COMICS«NEWS 

0(£©C(£ PJC7]®© 



SCIENCE INTERFACE 

We can't cover science too, 
but we can let you know who 
is. in our special article refer- 
ral service for keeping up to 
date. Whether you're an editor 
or a writer, you need to know 
the lastest findings. 



FANTASTIC COVERAGE 

•lust a partial list of the sub- 
jects which are covered in the 
Science Fiction Times. 

•Books in progress 

•Book reviews 

•Publishers 

•Small press 

•Reviews of magazines 

•Fanzines 

•Art books 

•New artists 

•Collector's best buys 

•Writer's markets 

•Records 

•Games 

•Television production 
•New Comics 
•Comics reviews 
•SF shops 
•People profiles 
•Interviews 
•SF fan clubs 
•SF organizations 
•SF study courses 
•Writer’s workshops 
•History of SF 
•Literary perspectives 
•SF glossary 
•Convention calendar 
•Convention news 
•Films in production 
•Film history 



NEW PLANET FOUND 
SCIENTISTS PUZZLED 

Where do science and science 
fiction converge. SF is not a 
prognosticator. Its spirit is to 
question, and this is the spirit 
of science as well. All that 
rises must converge. 



ARTISTS DISCOVERED IN 
STRANGE CIRCUMSTANCE 

New SF artists are presented 
— a showcase for public recog- 
nition when they need it most. 



STRANGE HAPPENINGS: 
AUTHORS DUESTIONED 

What would you ask your 
favorite SF author? We're 
giving you a chance in a 
special forum — no holds bar- 
red. Send the questions to us. 



AD PRICES DROP 

Because well over 10.000 
copies of the SFT will pass 
through the hands of over 
20.000 SF readers on every 
issue, the SFT is a unique 
bargain for the advertiser. Ask 
for more information if there is 
something special you want to 
do. Frofn classifieds at ten 
cents per word to full page 
display ads for only $100. 



NEWSTDRYTDLDDLDWAY 

Reviving an old newspaper 
tradition, SFT is running at 
least one story per issue. 



CDMIXCDMEBACK 

What price Superman? Are 
there any newcomers worth 
watching? Is there a renais- 
sance in SF comix? 



WEIRD WRITERS MARKETS 
DFFERDDD PAYMENT 

What are the editors buying? 
What are their restrictions? 



SF SHDPS BDDMING 

How does one start an SF shop, 
and what to do once you have. 
And where to find the SF shop 
nearest you. 



VIDEDREVDLUTIDN 

The video field is finally 
blossoming with individual 
dreams and endeavors far 
beyond the control of networks 
and government restriction. 



I Tub*sci 



SF NEWSPAPER DPENS 
NEW FIELD DFINOUIRY 

The question must be asked. 
Why an SF newspaper? Simply 
put. Science Fiction is no 
longer a ghetto-genre enjoyed 
by a small cult of enthusiasts 
who come together at conven- 
tions to talk shop. It is as field 
of international, intercultural 
importance which is shaping 
the very future it imagines. No 
longer just a toy, it is now the 
place where things are truly 
happening, from literature to 
the movies, from the labora- 
tory to the mpuntains of Mars. 
Science Fiction can still be 
loved by its fans, but it has 
new responsibilities as well. 
SF has come of age. 



SCREENPLAYS PLAY 
IMPDRTANTRDLE 

Serious attention is given 
to a subject which is shaping 
SF as surely as the traditional 
forms of science fiction writing. 



LDW PRICE WDN'T LAST 

We are introducing the SFT 
at such a low price just to 
seduce the readers who don’t 
think they can get their 
money’s worth. SFT will sell 
for SI per copy after this 
introductory period. Subscip- 
tions will be $12 per year, but 
we’re offering it now for only 
$6. That’s fifty cents an issue, 
and if you decide it’s not right 
for you, we’ll refund your 
money. Keep your first two 
issues, no questions asked. 
The SFT is for those who work, 
read, watch, listen or write 
Science Fiction, and love doing 
it. No one else. 



SUBSCRIBE NDW! 

■ Begin my subscription to SCIENCE FICTION TIMES as fast 
as possible. Enclosed is payment for a 12 issue subscription at 

I the special price of $6. 1 can cancel and receive a complete 
refund if I’m not completely satisfied with the first two issues. 



Name 



Street 



I Town 

I State Zip....- 

I Send to SCIENCE FICTION TIMES. 

339 Newbury Street. Boston MA 02115 
I (You may use the enclosed Galileo subscription envelope for 
convenience. Foreign subscribers add $1 .5() for postage.) 



JACK KIRBY AND DISNEY 
BLACK HOLE 
INFULLCDLDR 



Beginning with issue #6. the 
SFT will present the complete, 
uncut BLACK HOLE serial- 
ization in full four color. 
Disney Studios decided that 
only .lack Kirby, the master of 
comic strip art. could capture 
the dynamism and scale of the 
film. The multimillion dollar 
science fiction spectacular will 
comprise 26 episodes which 
will run four at a time, with 
special white offset stock for 
the color pages for collectors. 




6 



Son of Calculator 
and the Electronic 
Lifestyle 

by Steve North 



Personal computing has been in your 
immediate future for some time now. 
Here's what it will mean when it finally 
arrives 



R ecently a friend remarked 

that at the 1964 World’s Fair he 
was told that by now he’d have 
his choice of living on the moon, 
in a domed city under the sea, or in a 
space colony. It seems that those 
predictions don’t match the present 
reality. Attempting to predict the future 
is almost always an invitation to failure. 
Because all things are interrelated, a 
critical factor that affects the prediction 
goes overlooked. Nevertheless, it’s hard 
to resist the temptation to speculate on 
the future of personal computing. It does, 
after all, have the potential of affecting 
our lives more dramatically than previous 
inventions. 

Inventions such as the telescope, 
microscope, automobile, telephone, 
sound recordings, and television have all 
made drastic changes in society’s growth. 
All these devices expand our capability to 
see, hear, walk, and communicate — they 
expand our senses and sensibilities. 
Unlike any other tool, however, the 
personal computer can increase the 
power of the mind, not just the body. Of 
course, this sounds fanciful when you 
look at home computers used to play Star 
Trek and blackjack, but the revolutionary 
potential still exists. We must learn the 
right way to use the computers. 

THE EVOLUTION OF A REVOLUTION 

Internally a personal computer is a 
cut-down version of a big computer. In 
fact, the only difference between the 
home computers and their hereditary 
brethren is that they are smaller (about 
the size of a typewriter), a little slower 
(depending on what you use them for), 
and much less expensive. The hypo- 
thetical line separating large computers 
from small ones is fading. Thus, home 
computers are often scale models of 
large commercial systems — a sort of 



model railroad for the computer freak. 
This isn’t necessarily the best way to 
design a computer for people, however. 
Commercial systems are made to 
maximize the computer’s efficiency, not 
the power and flexibility available to the 
people who use it. These systems are 
machine oriented; home computers 
should be people oriented. 

The programming languages for 
personal computers have nearly all been 
running on large computer systems for 
the past ten or fifteen years. Although 
computer science is generally believed to 
be progressing at lightning speed, the 
state of the art in computer software 
(programming languages and programs 
themselves) doesn’t keep pace with 
hardware developments. The ways in 
which people interact with computers 
have changed little over the years. 
Indeed, because of the difficulty people 
have in changing computer programs 



(and using the existing programs) it 
becomes increasingly difficult to 
popularize major advances in computer 
software. 

The factors that made personal 
computers possible were both technologi- 
cal and economic. It can be hard to 
separate the two. The technological 
breakthrough that started it all was the 
microprocessor — it put all of a 
computer’s central processor on one 
small piece of silicon. The economic 
factor involved economies of large-scale 
production; an entire personal computer 
system that costs a few hundred dollars 
right off the shelf makes quite an 
attraction. 

WHAT IS A PERSONAL COMPUTER? 

A typical personal-computer system 
looks like a terminal with a keyboard and 
video-screen; it costs about $1000. Some 
systems (such as Mattel’s new system) 
hook up to your television set to save you 
the cost of buying a separate video 
monitor. Almost all systems offer a 
version of BASIC — a beginner’s pro- 
gramming language developed at Dart- 
mouth in the 1960s and later improved 
and expanded for general-purpose use. If 
you don’t want to write your own 
programs, some manufacturers sell pre- 
programmed cassettes that handle 
common applications such as game 
playing, engineering and statistical 
calculations, home-budget management, 
and investment analysis. But if these 
"canned” programs don’t suit your 
needs, you can learn with only moderate 
anguish to write your own. 

Personal computing now has a status 
similar to that of amateur radio about the 
time that commercial broadcasting first 
began, or that of a car owner back when 
there were few good roads and all drivers 
had to be mechanics. Many people who 





7 




buy personal computers don't have a 
clear idea of what it can do for them when 
they take it home. Obviously, computers 
have many good applications, but some 
don’t justify the expense of hundreds, or 
thousands, of dollars. Ed Judge, of the 
Tandy Corporation, manufacturer of 
more than one out of two personal 
computers, says. “I don’t think that 
anyone really knows why people buy 
home computers. That’s the $10,000 
question. 1 think most people buy our 
computer for self-education. They want 
to learn how a computer works.” 

LOOKING AHEAD 

T he present trend is toward 

faster, smaller, more powerful 
personal computers with very 
fine-resolution color displays 
(clearer pictures on the monitor) and a 
wider selection of preprogrammed 
cartridges that suit home applications, 
computer-based instruction (to help 
children in school), and games. BASIC 
will remain an important computer 
language because of the large number of 
people already using it, but it will 
eventually be supplanted by a more 
powerful language. BASIC forces you to 
examine problems in a sequential, 
step-by-step manner — it isn’t a true 
problem-solving language. More 
advanced languages encourage breaking 
up big problems into smaller ones that 
can be, in turn, broken down into small 
calculations which a computer can easily 
be programmed to handle. 

Talking, listening, and music-playing 
capabilities will also appear as standard 
features on computers within the next 
five years. You will be able to compose 
sonatas or learn to read music with your 
computer. It will respond to verbal 
orders. The computer won’t be able to 
understand speech, of course. There is a 
big difference between capturing, 
matching, and reacting to the wave 
patterns of a restricted set of sounds, and 
actually understanding the meaning 
behind them. In this way computers are 
(and will remain) smart machines rather 
than a new form of sentient intelligence. 

Preprogrammed cassettes or cartridges 
will be sold in the same way that books 
and magazines are now. For special- 
purpose applications you will need to 
know how to write your own programs, 
but there is no more need for the average 
computer user of the future to be a 
programmer than there is for the stereo 
user of the present to be an audio 
engineer. 

It isn’t clear whether the growth of 
personal computing will be gradual or 
explosive in the near future. This 
depends on such events as the intro- 
duction of low-cost hardware ($1000 is 
still not cheap) and plentiful software. 
Computer manufacturers also have their 



hands full educating potential users to 
the advantages of owning their own 
computers. 

COMPUTER NETWORKS 

When several people own computers, 
they inevitably begin trying to find ways 
to hook them together to share their 
programming and data-collection efforts. 
Such a hookup is known as a network. 



W HEN THE microcomputer in- 
dustry began its first hesitant 
steps as a new market, much 
of the energy was put into it 
by well-meaning hobbyists, overly en- 
thusiastic computer fanatics, and ripoff 
artists. Amid this chaos (and if you went 
to any of the early computer shows, you 
know that chaos is an underestimate) 
Adam Osborne sounded a clarion call. He 
began a refrain that he is still sounding, 
pointing out that the microcomputer 
industry had to become aware of the 
realities of business in order to survive. 
He insisted that the survivors would be 
few — and battle-scarred. 

These weren’t hollow words. Dr. 
Osborne was in the business himself. 
Starting with his own consulting firm, he 
moved into the publishing business 
where he initiated the concept of giving 
away computer programs and selling 
books. Traditionally, computer programs 



Stephen B. Gray, founder of the Amateur 
Computer Society, says, “I think the 
phone company will eventually get into 
the act. The easiest thing would be for 
them to give you just the bare minimum 
of hardware — only a screen and a 
keyboard — and for them to own a large 
computer with a library of programs. 
Then, whenever you need a program, 
even if it’s just once in a lifetime, it will 
be there in the computer, waiting for you 



were high-priced items and jealously 
guarded. Convinced that the necessarily 
low price tag of microcomputers made 
that unrealistic, he put his programs into 
book form and sold them at book prices. 
He realized early in the game that selling 
information instead of software 
“products” benefited everyone, and 
suited the new industry. 

The strategy must have been 
successful. McGraw-Hill bought out 
Osborne & Associates last year, 
converting Dr. Osborne’s company into a 
separate book division of the parent 
company with Dr. Osborne as its head. 
Why fool with a winning strategy? 

In addition to keeping his own house in 
order. Dr. Osborne began speaking at 
seminars (held at computer shows) on the 
needs of the industry. He began a 
column(“From the Fountainhead”) each 
month in Interface Age in which he 
discussed problems that buyers have with 



1 







Movers 

and 

Shakers 



8 

to pull it out. Present laws prevent the 
phone company from offering data 
services, but the laws can always be 
changed.” 

A widespread network would allow 
instant access to other things besides 
computer programs. News reports, stock 
quotations, magazines, encyclopedias, 
entire libraries, and perhaps even films 
and art works would await you. Instead 
of skimming through a newspaper to find 
the news that interests you, you might be 
able to type into your keyboard, “What 
happened at the SALT talks today?" 

Computer scientist Ted Nelson, an 
early proponent of personal computing, 
has developed an “electronic literature” 
that can be represented only on a 
computer’s video screen. His text, called 
Hypertext, isn’t always linear. It 
combines a variety of sequential and 
parallel relationships in the text. In a 
regular book, you start at page one and 
read through to the end. With Hypertext, 
you can freely explore relationships 
between different sections of the book, or 
even between one book and another. For 
example, where a textual passage is 
quoted, a “window” on the screen shows 
you the quoted section of the second 
work. By manipulating this window, you 
can see the context of the quote and 
relevant information. More powerful 
relationships between texts let you 
consider a body of writings on one topic 



Personal-computer 
networking could 
threaten the postal 
system's existence. You 
could compose and edit a 
letter, then send it to 
someone anywhere else 
on the network within 
seconds. 

as a whole rather than as discrete 
packages of information. 

Personal-computer networking could 
threaten the postal system’s existence. 
You could compose and edit a letter, then 
send it to someone anywhere else on the 
network within seconds. You could, of 
course, make a phone call instead, but 
this way you could transmit documents. 
Such networks also lend themselves to 
sophisticated, multiplayer games. It 
wouldn’t be difficult to imagine games of 
chess, bridge, or monopoly that spanned 
thousands of miles due to computer 
networking. The next step, the mind- 
blowing step, is when the computer 
becomes an active participant in the 
game. One of the most challenging (and 
addictive) computer games yet devised is 
a fantasy game called Adventure. Present 
versions of this game allow one person to 



sellers, sellers have with buyers, software 
vendors have with hardware vendors, and 
so on. He has tackled every important 
problem from the protection that a vendor 
has against bootleggers who sell unau- 
thorized copies of their software to how to 
get your money back from a mailorder 
distributor who doesn’t send you what he 
advertised. 

In order to remain effective. Dr. 
Osborne has remained accessible. People 
who go to computer shows, get involved 
with manufacturer’s groups, or other 
professional activities see him frequently. 
He’s too tall to hide in a crowd, besides, 
he’s usually talking to people in front of a 
banner proudly proclaiming “Osborne & 
Associates”. When he isn’t talking to 
people, he seems to be taking orders for 
more books. 

Although Dr. Osborne has focused 
primarily on making microcomputers 
acceptable as small business exchange 
systems and ensuring that the manu- 
facturers were up to the challenge, his 
influence reaches everyone in the micro- 
computer and personal computer market- 
place. His books introducing readers to 
understanding microprocessors have 
become classic reference books and have 
gone through many printings. If there 
was ever a case of a cash register 
testifying to a man’s success, it’s so with 
Adam Osborne. 

The exciting thing about observing a 




person such as Dr. Osborne is that he 
created the role he plays from whole 
cloth. He isn’t a consumer or industry 
advocate, but a participant with a critical 
eye who finds truth on both sides of the 
fence. He has made a career of making 
astute, constructive observations. Now if 
we could only clone him to do the same 
for the auto industry. 

— Ed Teja 



search for treasure and adventure in a 
small world simulated inside the com- 
puter. The computer acts as the player’s 
eyes and hands, responding to English 
commands such as TAKE AXE or 
UNLOCK DOOR or GO NORTH. The 
computer might say, “I’m in a small 
room. There is a screwdriver here and a 
locked door.” The player could issue 
commands to unlock the door (if he has 
keys) or pick up the screwdriver. He 
might tell it to try to force the door with 
open with the screwdriver. The 
properties of the objects in the game and 
the effects of various actions are fixed in 
advance by the programmer. Each game 
has at least a few hazards and rewards. In 
short. Adventure is a super puzzle. 

Imagine a dynamically changing ver- 
sion with several players, each with their 
own keyboard. The players could help 
(hinder) each other or exchange mes- 
sages. 

A few primitive computer networks 
already exist — mostly they are in the 
form of electronic newspapers and 
two-way cable television. Although they 
constitute significant advances, they let 
the user interact only in a limited way. 
What is required is not only the network’s 
existence, but also computer programs 
that help you choose from among the 
large amounts of data and programs in an 
easy-to-use manner. It is likely that the 
realization of computer networks will 
come from extensions of cable television, 
telephone, or other communications 
networks rather than from developments 
in personal computing per se. Personal 
computers available offer little compati- 
bility or standardization. 

THE ULTIMA TE PERSONAL 
COMPUTER 

Ideally, a personal computer should be 
inexpensive, portable, and highly inter- 
active. It should be something you can 
carry around and use in your daily life as 
easily as you do a notebook and paper. It 
should plug into a computer network at 
work or at home (perhaps over a 
telephone), or function independently. It 
should be simple to use — almost 
obvious. This last, however, might prove 
an unattainable goal. Many people 
believe that computers can be as easy to 
use as televisions and electronic games. 
While it is true that good application 
programs make the computer simple to 
operate, at the same time they don’t put 
the full potential of the computer at your 
disposal. If a computer is a tool for 
expanding the mind, then controlling it 
will require thinking. The fantasy that 
computers will think for you is dangerous 
and false. 

A computer can simulate the stock 
market, a solar-energy system, or the 
game of bridge. If the program is written 
with a human player in mind, it can be 




9 



interactive and enjoyable to use. To 
develop the playing strategy for the 
simulation, however, the programmer 
must work long and hard, testing and 
refining the routines. Running a stock 
market simulation might be “ridiculously 
simple,” but creating an accurate model 
of the stock market is not. To fully use the 
computer, you cannot remain a passive 
operator. Therefore, the concept of the 
“ultimate all-powerful ridiculously 
simple virtual extension of your own 
mind” may be nothing but a myth. 

It is still valid, however, to talk about 
the ultimate personal computer. It would 
have an optimum size that coincides with 
that of a notebook. Anything larger would 
be difficult to carry around. Anything 
smaller, such as a wristwatch-sized 
computer, couldn’t provide reasonable 
text and graphics display. The computer 
must have high-quality graphics for 
showing diagrams, pictures, or even 
animated cartoons. (Imagine directing 
your own movie with computer-generated 
actors and backgrounds.) The computer 
should have a touch-sensitive flat screen, 
or a standard keyboard, or both, as well 
as audio inputs and outputs for music and 
speech. It needs a massive internal 
memory that can store hundreds of 
books, films, letters, receipts, songs, and 
simulations. 

SO HOW LONG DO WE WAIT? 

Curiously enough, most of the 
components for our idea are within our 
current technological grasp. Touch- 
•sensitive displays, flat screens, and high- 
capacity memories are being refined and 
made less expensive to produce. 
Researchers at Xerox’s Palo Alto. 
California, research center have de- 
veloped a proposal for a “Personal 
Dynamic Media.” called a Dynabook, 
that is a version of the computer we have 
defined. According to its original 
description, the Dynabook should be “no 
larger than a notebook; weigh less than 4 
lbs; the visual display should be able to 
represent at least 4000 characters with 
contrast ratios approaching that of a 
book; dynamic graphics of a reasonable 
quality should be possible; there should 
be removable local storage of at least one 
million characters (about 500 book 
pages) traded off against several hours of 
voice and music files.” 

According to John Lees, a computer 
scientist at the University of Michigan, 
“The Dynabook concept had the potential 
to attract a great number of society’s 
institutions. Look at what will be affected 
by the widespread use of Dynabooks, 
particularly in networks, via phone lines 
or cable television. For correspondence 
(and the postal system) the Dynabook has 
the capabilities of a typewriter in a 
smaller, more versatile, package. In 
publishing, the Dynabook is a personal 



printing press. Your textbooks can be a 
memory file. Your family can receive its 
newspapers on a reusable file, its 
monthly magazines on another reusable 
file. In education, the new learning 
activities possible are boundless, and 
they depend less and less on dedicated 
school facilities. As for calculators, 
televisions, and radios, all would face a 
very stiff challenge. Television in partic- 
ular would be in trouble — who’s going 
to watch poor television programs when 
they can link up with the other kids on the 
block for a game of really super Star Trek 
or Star Trader? The possibilities boggle 
the imagination. 

The Dynabook concept is the culmina- 
tion of many mind-expanding 
applications for a personal computer, 
brought together into one compact unit. 
The appearance of portable personal 
computers like this isn’t far off. TTie heart 



of the system, highly developed and 
interactive programs, aren’t ready yet, 
however. This means that you can’t 
expect to see anything as versatile and 
fun as a Dynabook-style computer until 
long after the advent of such 
comparatively simple advances as 
hand-held BASIC-speaking computers., 
The personal computer’s ultimate 
purpose isn’t to help balance your 
checkbook, remind you when to change 
your engine oil, turn thermostats up or 
down, or provide instant stock quotes. 
These and most other common 
prophecies of personal-computer 
applications are trivial and irrelevant. 
The most important service the personal 
computer will provide is to improve your 
life, and help you ask “what if?” For 
further details, watch the next ten years! 






”RiUy as Stunning as any of his 
heroes excursions to the stars 
-Asimov’s own journey. 

'His life story is fascinating science-fiction specialist to 



—even uplifting,” Ben Bova 
said of Asimov’s autobio- 
graphical account of his 
youth, In Memory Yet Green. 
And Time called it "cease- 
lessly informative and enter- 
taining.” Isaac Asimov 
carries on in the same 
engaging style in this story 
of the years that followed, 
tracing his transition from 



the wide-ranging author 
Carl Sagan calls "the grea- 
test explainer of the age.” 

Here, in scores of anec- 
dotes, is Asimov: a carefully 
detailed self-portrait of the 
man George Gaylord Simp- 
son hails as "a national 
wonder and a natural 
resource.” 

$19.95 at all booksellers. 




INJOY STILL FELT 

THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF 

ISAAC 
ASIMOV 

1954-1978 

•Bob Mecoy. Future Life, oh fn Memory Yet Green 

.•I DOUBLEDAY 



10 



Your Car and 
Its Computer 

by Ed Teja 



H aving trouble with your 
1999 juggernaut? Why not pull 
into the station off to the right 
and have its programming 
checked? You know your car’s computer- 
ized system is subject to a lot of wear, and 
its internal adjustments can only com- 
pensate for so much variation in 
performance. And did you ever consider 
the number of things that the on-board 
computer is responsible for? Unlike the 
cars of the 70s and 80s, which used a 
computer only to optimize the ignition 
system and fuel flow through the 
supercharger, today’s models put nearly 
every automotive function under 
computer control. 



Consider the dash-mounted breath 
analyzer, for example. Before they 
became mandatory accessories, even 
drunks could start a car. All they needed 
was a key! Your car is too smart for that. 
Anything that indicates that the driver 
has had more than the legal limit of 
drinks locks out the ignition system. 

You don’t think about it much, but 
before cars came equipped with low-cost 
photocells people had to turn on their 



headlights when it got dark. Of course, 
dark meant different things to different 
people, so sometimes some cars would 
have their lights on, while others had 
them off. 

Driving back in the 80s was completely 
manual, other than for a few simple- 
minded gadgets, such as cruise control. 
’The so-called power and automatic 
devices weren’t really. It was actually 
possible to drive with the front of your car 





Words 

Before you can talk computer — which is 
similar to talking turkey, if you’re a 
turkey farmer — you have to know the 
lingo. Here is a glossary of terms you’ll 
need to know when you start to haunt the 
environs of your local computer club or 
subscribe to a computer magazine. 

Alphanumeric — represents both letters 
and numbers; as opposed to alpha-only or 
numeric-only devices. 

ASCII — An acronym for the American 
Standard Code for Information Exchange. 
It’s a 7-bit code that represents letters, 
punctuation, and control codes. 

Analog — a continuous signal, as opposed 
to discrete digital signals. Audio from 
your hifi is analog; computers compre- 
hend digital only. 

Analog-to-digital conversion — called A/D 
conversion, or just ADC, the process that 
makes continuous signals comprehen- 
sible to computers. 



Assembler Language — a computer lang- 
uage that produces machine instructions. 
BCD — a binary-coded decimal; a 4-bit 
code for the numbers 0 through 9. 
Benchmark — a test program used to 
compare computers’ relative speeds. 

Bit — a single digit of binary (base 2) 
number. 

Bus — a set of hardware lines used to 
connect several devices together, thus 
you will hear of an address buS, a data 
bus, and so on. 

Character — an information element. The 
letter “C” is an element of the alphabet, 
thus it is a character of that alphabet. 
CRT — cathode ray tube. A display device 
that uses the same technology as your 
television, whose screen is in a CRT. 
Digital-to-analog conversion — the 
reverse of ADC. 

Direct Memory Access [or DMA] — an 
input/output technique for transferring 
data between a peripheral device and 
memory without using the processor. 
EPROM — Erasable Programmable Read- 
Only Memory. A device for storing 
programs or data that will be needed for 
some time. 

GIGO — Garbage In Garbage Out. The 
most common failing of computer 
programs. 

Hardware — the system’s circuitry. 
High-level language — such as PASCAL, 
BASIC, or FORTRAN provides a way of 



writing complex programs easily. Each 
instruction provides more than one 
machine instruction. 

Input — transferring information into the 
processor or memory. 

Interface — the circuitry (or software) that 
goes between two devices or processes to 
ensure that they work smoothly together. 
Interrupt — a disruption of the expected 
program flow. 

Machine code — instructions understood 
and executed by the processor. 

Nybble — half a byte, or four bits. 

Object code — code written in machine 
instructions. 

Output — transferring information to the 
outside world. 

Peripheral — a device that is connected to 
the processor in order to work with it. 
Random-access memory — temporary 
storage devices. When you turn the 
machine off, an>thing stored here goes 
away. 

Register — where the processor tucks 
away bits of information. 

String — a group (flock?) of characters 
that, taken together, have some meaning. 
The characters (letters) that make up a 
word constitute a string. 

This far-from-complete list shoul *■ get 
you started in wading through the 
literature. Don’t worry about learning the 
terms; worry about using them correctly 



Noralic Barnett 



at an unsafe distance from the rear of the 
car on front of you. No on-board 
navigators existed. A large number of 
accidents resulted. Humans couldn’t 
calculate safe stopping distances, taking 
into account road conditions and the car’s 
condition and speed, as accurately as 
today’s computers can. 

Drivers had to navigate by reading 
street signs. Because there weren’t any 
on-board computers, there was no 
practical method of implementing sophis- 
ticated traffic-flow systems. Siemens 
Corp had worked out the details for 
microwave transponders that identified 
and assisted cars and drivers way back in 
the 70s; they planned car-borne 
responder units that could run indefini- 
tely on solar cells. Initially the system 
was intended for short-haul dispatching 
centers, ambulance services and police 
and fire departments. It didn’t take long 
. for auto manufacturers to catch on to the 
commercial possibilities. They took the 
legally required anti-collision devices 
back to the drawing board to add the full 
navigational capabilities that now come 
standard on the lowest-priced model. 

Today, of course, every major city has a 
traffic-control computer that finds you the 
quickest, least congested route to your 
destination. It monitors your individual 
progress past its transponder check- 
points. The auto-identification system 
also has reduced car theft dramatically. 



“A charming sequel to Jeppson's Second Experiment.” 

—Booklist 

“Intriguing, intellectually stimulating . .’’—Library Journal 

“A good yam, romping through time and space from beginning to 
end, or vice versa . Events, cosmic and human, viewed through 
the sensors of a Hamlet-like robot.”— Roger Zelazny 




A novel by J.Q JEPPSON 

Autha of THE SECOND EXPERIMENT 

Houghton Mifflin Company 2 Park street, Boston, Massachusetts 02107 




Today’s car thief needs to know as much 
about computer programming as he does 
lock picking. 

There was a time when you knew 
something was wrong with your car when 
it began making terrible noises or 
stopped running. Adding diagnostics was 
a trivial job for the auto designers once 
computer control was established, but it 
was a tremendous leap for auto owners. 
Now you get advance warning. You can 
have your car repaired when a two-dollar 



part begins to go bad instead of when the 
two-dollar piece lets loose of the $400 
part, destroying the $600 part under it. 

The really nice thing about computer- 
controlled diagnostics is that they operate 
automatically. By paying attention to the 
early warnings about mechanical 
inefficiencies under the hood, you can 
save the cost of all of this electronic magic 
in repair bills over the life of your car. 







and Other Stories 
by VONDA N. McINTYRE 

Winner of both The Nebula Award and The Hugo Award 
Author of Dreamsnake 

“She’s one of the best already, and it's exciting to think 
of the long, bright road ahead of her.’’— PETER S. BEAGLE 
*10.95, now at your bookstore 

Houghton Mifflin Company 

2 Park St., Boston. Mass. 02107 



$9.95 at bookstores 
or write to: 







Cortney Skinner 



If You Don't Talk 
to Your Stereo, 

I Will 

by Eric Blair 



O UT OF JAPAN COMES the first 
exciting development in stereo 
and television for quite some 
time. At the Winter Consumer 
Electronics Show (WCES), Toshiba 
America, Inc. showed its prototypes of 
the appliances of tomorrow — devices that 
respond to their owner’s voice. 

The new units feature an Acoustic 
Remote-Controlled System (ARCS) that 
provides this hands-free, voice-operated 



Defending 
the Empire: 
Intelligent Games 

by Ed Teja 



O NCE UPON A time, when 
someone made up a game, the 
paraphernalia required to play it 
might include some chalk marks 
on the pavement, a rock or two for 
markers, and the odd bit of string. The 
focal point of these games was fre- 
quently found in contests of manual 
dexterity — someone, somewhere, tried to 
outmuscle, outwrestle, or otherwise 
overcome or overwhelm the opposition. 
Today, if someone tells you they just 
made up a game, it’s likely that to play it 
you must sit in front of a video display 
defending your side (often referred to as 
“the empire” rather than the archaic 
“good guys”) against the machinations 
of a human opponent or, somehow more 
diabolically, a computer. 

The heritage of computer game 
playing can be found in a branch of 
computer science called “simulation.” 
The idea behind simulation is that the 



problems that decision makers must face 
in the “real world” can be approximated 
with a computer. You get a chance to try 
out various strategies to see which will be 
the most effective when the time comes 
to make the final decision. Thus, the 
point of simulation is actually learning — 
learning specific skills. In order to try out 
the alternative strategies, a programmer 
creates a “model” of the situation. He 
maps out the cause-effect relationships 
that exist and approximates the 
conditions that will exist when the 
decision must be made. 

PLAYING FOR KEEPS 

The Pentagon is a bastion of game 
players. Countless tax dollars support a 
massive simulation that tracks the 
ever-changing character of the world’s 
potential for a nuclear-type World War 
Last. They play with big chips. 



To begin modeling such a situation, the 
programmer must have a good evaluation 
of the current situation, and an idea of the 
relative importance of various items that 
make up the model. While you’d get the 
best results by leaving absolutely nothing 
out of the model, you’d also never finish 
making it. Thus you must eliminate those 
things that have the least effect on the 
model’s performance. What kinds of 
things? All kinds of things. You could 
probably expect that the altitude of Paris 
hemlines would have a minimal impact, 
but don’t count it out without some 
research. (This game stuff sounds like 
work.) For our world war model, the 
location of ICBMs (and their payloads) 
plays an important role. Not weighing 
things carefully can prove embarassing. 
An interesting (perhaps apocryphal) story 
has it that the Pentagon set about to use 
the model to determine what single 
resource was the most vital in time of 
war. The bills of materials for all essential 
goods were fed into the computer. The 
requirements of the nation were checked 
and counterchecked. After much wailing 
and gnashing of teeth (on the 
programmer’s part — computers don’t 
have teeth) the results were out. Paint. 
Paint was the common element to the 
national defense. Someone forgot to 
mention to the programmer that not all 
materials were equally important. Talk 
about learning. 



remote control. The stereo memorizes 
(during a training period) and responds to 
its owner’s voice by analyzing the voice’s 
characteristics and matching its analysis 
to the patterns stored in the training 
period. Computer control (an eight-bit 
microprocessor, to be precise) provides 
comprehension of seventeen words that 
result in twenty-one different operations 
that range from turning the unit ON and 
OFF to controlling the cassette deck’s 
operation. 

The voice-actuated television responds 
to thirty words, if you count the numbers 
1 through 12 as words. The set beeps 
when it hears a command that it 
understands — ^just to let you know that it 
heard you — and it flashes a light-emitting 
diode (LED) when it gets confused. 

Notice that the “look” of the 80s, at 
least as far as stereo systems and 
televisions is concerned, isn’t really a 
new appearance. It’s a new man-machine 
interface. Don’t expect appliances to 
change too much externally for a while, 
either. They keep getting smaller, but 
there are limits to how small they can get 
and still be useful. It’s already quite a 
chore for designers to get all the 
necessary knobs, dials, meters, and 
lights on the front panel and still leave 
enough room for fingerprints. And now 
you’ll have to have enough space for a 
microphone. The system does need ears, 
after all. 



But the model has its uses. Suppose a 
general wants to know the actual 
decrease in deterrent capability that will 
result from a budget cut. His first task is 
to define deterrent capability. Are 
offensive weapons of deterrent value? Do 
ten ICBMs equal fifteen jet fighters? If he 
can answer questions such as these, he 
will get an answer — based on those 
premises. The model is only as good as its 
inputs. In programmer lingo — GIGO, 
garbage in, garbage out. The model can 
have as many levels of complexity as 
needed, but there are practical limits. 
The model must be understandable, or it 
is worthless. That’s one of the nice things 
about games. The policy of “Keep It 
Simple. Stupid” (KISS) applies to 
computers perhaps even more than 
anywhere else. 

But enough of the dire mutterings of 
the Hawks. What about the good clean 
fun? Let’s look at the scenario for a 
run-of-the-mill Star Trek game written by 
a group of wayward engineers a few years 
back. 

THE FINAL FRONTIER AND 
THE LAST STRAW 

To play Star Trek, you need a universe 
ripe for exploration. Because a universe 
isn’t an off-the-shelf item, out program 
created one. Using number arrays (called 
matrices), we defined known space 



Adding intelligence in the form of a 
microprocessor opens new horizons for 
appliance designers. You’d expect that a 
computer controller inside the system 
would do more than just interpret a 
human’s commands. That has been the 
trend. Look at all the goodies that have 
been added onto microwave ovens since 
they were computerized. They even tell 
time and give cooking advice. The 
important question is, however: What 
would you want the computer to do? 
Stereo components are already quite 
sophisticated. Some jobs the micro- 
processor would be extremely good at, 
such as working with the tape transport to 
control braking and tape speed to take 
better care of the tape and ensure 



constant tape speed — furnishing better 
performance. The better tape decks come 
with built-in microprocessors for that 
very reason. They don’t need another 
one. 

Besides, if you like the idea of a 
separate-component stereo system, you 
don’t want one computer running every- 
thing. That would entail putting all the 
components together in a clump to avoid 
making your living room look like a Bell 
telephone exchange. That scheme 
would, in short order, bring you full circle 
back to the monolithic television-stereo 
all-in-one. When the stereo breaks, the 
whole mess goes into the shop for six 
years (the technician has to retrain for 
computer repair). 



WARRIOR-OUTLAW’S 

REVENGE 

The warrior-outlaw known as the Wolf 
seeks to create havoc, doubling his might 
through the use of a physical/psychic dou- 
ble from far-away Terra — and only the vic- 
tory of the Compact, harnessing the terri- 
ble energies of the matrix, can stop him... 
Read and enjoy all of the “Bloody Sun" 
novels by Marion Zimmer Bradley. 

DAW BOOKS ORIGEVALS 

At your bookstore, or mail this coupon to: 



MARION 

ZIMMER BRADLEY 
TWDTO 






3'V 




NEW AMERICAN LIBRARY 

P.O. Box 999, Bergenfield, NJ 07621 

RUSH me these MARION ZLMMER BRADLEY titles today! I include my 



check or money order (no CODs or cash) plus 504 postage and 


handling. 


No. of 
Copies 


Book No. 


Title 


Price 

inU.S. 


Price 
in Canada 


□ 


UE1540 


TWO TO CONQUER 


$2.25 


$2.50 


□ 


LJJ1323 


THE FORBIDDEN TOWER 


1.95 


1.95 


□ 


1111307 


THE HERITAGE OF 
HASTUR 


1.95 


1.95 


□ 


mi381 


STORMQUEEN! 


1.95 


1.95 


□ 


UW1440 


THE SPELL SWORD 


1.50 


1.50 


$ 


TOTAL PRICE OF TITLES SELECTED 






$0.50 


Add Postage and Handling 






$ 


TOTAL ENCLOSED in check or money order 




Name 


















B5 


Address 










City 




State 


Zip 





Allow a minimum of four weeks for delivery. This offer subject to with- 
drawal without notice. Price and number subject to change without 
notice. 



14 



On the other hand, there might be a 
market for a central controller unit. The 
controller unit would be a separate 
component. It wouldn’t play music, 
change records, or perform any useful 
service (except maybe tell time) — 
by itself, that is. Aha! Now you could 
plug in a tape recorder and amplifier to 
make a complete voice-controlled sound 
system. You could give the intelligent 



controller a command, such as, “Stereo 
power ON at 2:30 PM. Patch tape 
deck output into amplifier unit. Tape deck 
to play in stereo. Volume at level one. 
Stop tape deck at 3:30. Power OFF.” Hey 
that would be handy! Now you can be 
greeted at the door by your favorite 
music. Tie the system into a burglar 
alarm to greet uninvited guests with the 
1812 Overture played slightly above the 




in quadrants. Inside each quadrant sat 
more arrays, which defined sectors. 
Rather than let the Enterprise exist just 
anywhere, we gave her a choice of 
sixty-four locations within each sector. 
This limit kept the math manageable — a 
serious consideration in any model. 

Next, we needed Klingons (AKA bad 
guys). We let the computer pick a 
number between ten and one hundred to 
represent the number of Klingons in the 
known universe. We didn’t care about the 
unknown universe, we weren’t going 
there. The bad guys were spread liberally 
throughout the universe (along with stars 
and starbases). We never let there be 
more than five in any one quadrant, 
however, as experience proved that five 
Klingons were fatal to the Enterprise 
— always. 

Thus was the universe created. Not 
incredibly complex, but even this simple- 
minded construct took a fair amount of 
work to get going. You can imagine what 
they go through at the Pentagon. The 
entire definition of the universe was 
subjective — it was as large as we could 
make it without running out of memory 
in our computer. We introduced as 
many variables as it could manage. 



The Enterprise then was launched. The 
sector and quadrant were again selected 
by the computer. (The computer uses a 
random-number generator to pick 
numbers, by the way.) This started the 
game with a bang. In fact, every once in a 
while, the player at the helm (each player 
was his own entire crew) would be 
greeted by a display on the screen that 
read: 

THIS IS STAR TREK 

YOU HAVE 53.8 YEARS TO DESTROY 

49 KLINGONS 

WARP INTO QUADRANT 7.3 
ENTERPRISE DESTROYED!!! 

Not exactly a perfect beginning. 

Assuming the player made it into the 
first quadrant, he began seeking out and 
destroying Klingons. The idea was to kill 
all of the bad guys before the time ran 
out, you ran out of fuel, or they killed you. 
Now isn’t that better than that nasty, 
bloodthirsty Pentagon simulation? 

This digression shows you a little bit of 
what goes into creating a computer-con- 
trolled game. Toy manufacturers use the 
same basic approach, whether they make 
“Breakout” or an auto race game, or if 
they write a balance-your-checkbook 
program (except that Gremlins replace 



threshold of pain. (You’d better have a 
good system for that.) 

Our theoretical controller would be 
extremely flexible. To add components to 
the system, you’d just plug them in and 
teach the controller a few new 
commands. The controller functions as a 
power controller, patch panel (connecting 
one device to another), and function 
controller. The better units would even 
turn off any components not being used 
to save energy and wear and tear on the 
system. The controller units could run 
tests (called diagnostics) on your stereo 
for you periodically. Computers test 
themselves, why not apply the technique 
to your stereo? This kind of function suits 
a microprocessor’s capabilities. 

At this point you might have noticed 
some similarities between our hypo- 
thetical controller and Steve North’s 
personal computers. Yes, it’s true. A 
personal computer with the addition of 
some hardware and software would fill 
the bill. The point of all this is that your 
first computer might not come in the 
shape of a computer — it might look like a 
stereo. A dedicated controller would be 
cheaper than most computers. It wouldn’t 
need a display, a complete keyboard nor 
as much memory. It wouldn’t need to be 
programmable. That doesn’t mean it 
wouldn’t be a computer. 



Klingons in the check balancing process). 
But not everyone has a computer. That 
revelation hit companies like Mattel early 
on. One approach, used by Atari, was to 
sell you a dedicated computer (called a 
video game) that you could hook to the 
television and play. You add games by 
buying cartridges. Computer companies, 
such as Apple, favored selling you the 
computer, which you could hook to your 
television and program, and which other 
people would sell you games for. 

The toy manufacturers didn’t want to 
make computers. They didn’t want to 
miss out on the computer-game market, 
either. After a few false starts, came the 
intelligent game. When these guys make 
a toy, they don’t fool around with chalk 
marks and the odd bit of string. They 
don’t try to sell you a computer. They sell 
you a lot of computers, each in its own 
plastic shell. 



TOYLAND NEVER PARADED LIKE 
THIS BEFORE 

T his year greets, along with 

a new spring, Mattel’s Flash 
Gordon Space Game (for one). It 
is a pocket-sized, self-contained 
computer that operates on a 9-volt 
transistor battery. The game, designed 
for one or two players, features Flash’s 
Arborian rocket ship defending itself 
against attacks from Ming’s computer- ^ 



IS 



The Courage 
To Dre2un... 



This is the essence of Science Fiction. The 
spirit of our future is in the story of pioneers; 
the inner need for adventure, the love of 
truth, each individual's search for a place of 
his or her own. Galileo is the magazine of 
things to come. Galileo is the new magazine 
of great science fiction and the new frontiers 
of science fact. Articles by major scientists 
like Carl Sagan, David Wilson, and Arthur 
C. Clarke explore such topics as atomic and 
genetic research, astrophysics, and the 
coming computer technology. Reviews, 
interviews and previews are highlighted by 
Robert Silverberg, Marvin Kaye and David 
Gerrold on books, games and movies. 
Lighter subjects include fashions of the 
future, automobiles of tomorrow, and 
bicycles in space. Superb illustration by the 




Named "one of the best among SF mags" by 
LIBRARY JOURNAL in our very first year! 




finest artists in the field titillate the imagin- 
ation. But the best parts are the stories, 
where science becomes the future, by such 
authors as Harlan Ellison, Marion Zimmer 
Bradley, and Jack Williamson. Great novels 
like Larry Niven's long-awaited sequel THE 
RINGWORLD ENGINEERS are serialized 



complete and uncut. 
From pathos to ad- 
venture, from the 
horrific to visions of 
the ideal, it's yours. 

Kovin O' Donnell. Jr. • M. Lu<»e 

Gaii 

MAGAZINE OF SCIEN 



Subscribe today 
for all the 
tomorrows to 
come. 



Fabulous! I'd like the special subscription 
rate marked below. 

My payment is enclosed. 

□ 6 issues for $9(save $2.70) 

□ 12 issues for $15(save $8.40) 

Outside USA add 50 cents per issue 



Name 

Street State 

Town Zip 

Send to: Galileo Magazine, Dept. GX 
339 Newbury Street, Boston MA 02115 



16 



Careers 




Galaxy looks at jobs in tomorrow's 
computer industry — and how to prepare 
for them. 

F YOU’RE PLANNING to work 
in the personal computing field 
in the future, get ready for some 
changes — fast changes. First of 
all, personal computing is rapidly be- 
coming big business, and the companies 
that will be in the running tomorrow will 
be the ones that recognize it now. 
Already the former garage shops, such as 
Atari and Apple, have moved into the big 
times, and their executives worry about 
debt financing, labor disputes, and the 
price of gold just like their counterparts at 
IBM. Large conglomerates — Exxon, to 
name but one — are buying up all of the 
small, profitable electronic companies 
that they can work out a good deal with. 
The cash it has in the bank makes a big 
difference in whether or not a company 
makes it in the long run. 

But enough of the industry as a whole. 
You want to know what you should be 
studying to get into the field. Computer 



science is always a good bet. Theoreti- 
cally. anyway, whatever is being taught 
should pace current events in the real 
world — but don’t count on it. Academic 
institutions tend to wander into the muck 
and mire of, well, academia, instead of 
focusing on the things you’ll need to 
know on the job. Still, a background in 
computer science will give you the 
fundamentals to build on. 

To become skilled at writing the types 



of programs that will be needed by the 
computers of tomorrow, sharpen up your 
business and finance knowhow. Just take 
a look in any of the many magazines 
dedicated to personal computing (such as 
Creative Computing, Byte, or Kilobaud) 
and you’ll see that the demand for good 
business programs far outweighs that for 
any other kind. Judging by the number of 
complaints coming from users, those on 
the market today aren’t completely doing 




controlled raiders. You get digital 
scoring, an arming switch, a guidance- 
control lever, and a fire-control button 
(obviously the most important part). All 
this and simulated war sounds, too. 

But not everyone enjoys war games. 
Some of us prefer natural disasters. And 
what could be more natural than playing 
Catastrophe, wherein you depend on 



reflexes to save you from crumbling 
rocks, quake shocks, and meteorite 
showers. You stop the meteorites by 
shooting them with missies; juggling 
boulders in the air saves the city below 
you from destruction; catching bricks 
before they fall from a skyscraper gets 
you through the quakes. This also 
requires a 9-volt battery. And the 



Germans thought that the V-2 was 
hot — they should’ve invented the 9-volt 
battery! 

Not all games center on violence, of 
course. Card games (Computer Gin) and 
a Horoscope Computer, plus a series of 
sports games, round out Mattel’s lineup. 
But, to be fair, it is the violent games that 
provide the challenge. Even chess, after 
all, is a war game. And given the lines 
around toy booths at consumer-elec- 
tronics shows, the manufacturers are 
giving the public exactly what it wants. 
Tbey are doing it extremely well, too. The 
hand-held, battery-operated games free 
the player from the living room the same 
way that microcomputer technology 
sprung programmers from the confines of 
climate-controlled computer rooms. 

The advent of portable intelligent 
games might be just the ticket to offset 
the doldrums from waiting in lines and 
doctor’s offices. If you have a plastic box 
full of Brain Baffler in your pocket, for 
example, you can learn while you wait. 
This Mattel creation will actually match 
wits with you. Its eight games include 
“Flash World’’ — in which you spell out 
the longest word you can from computer- 
supplied letters with one letter changing 
every second, a version of hangman 
called “Go Hang,” and other word and 
number skill games. This, like Texas 
Instruments’ Speak N Spell, is a 
fun-to-use teaching machine. 




the job — there’s plenty of room for 
newcomers. That should last as long as 
manufacturers keep making new 
computers. 

There is a continuing demand for 
newer, better, cheaper, more verstaile, 
more specialized, and smaller computers, 
too. If your interests lie in the hardware 
field (the nuts and bolts end of the 
business), you wouldn’t be wasting your 
time by studying physics. You might be 
the one to produce the next advance in 
high-quality flat displays. RCA is looking 
for people to do even more work on 
high-persistance phosphors for cathode- 
ray tubes. Someone has to design 
keyboards and integrated curcuits. 
Someone must define the packaging, 
including development of lighter weight, 
yet stronger, packaging materials — pref- 
erably not based on petroleum. 

Personal computing is even opening up 
some totally new horizons. Software 
publishing describes a new industry that 
supports widespread use of computers. 
Software publishers select, package, and 
distribute programs at prices that indi- 
viduals can afford. They must offer a 
catalog of programs that satisfies com- 
puter owners’ needs. The programs’ 
authors are independent freelancers, in 
many cases, who receive royalties based 
on their programs’ actual sales. To date 
no one has made major inroads into 
becoming a software-author’s agent, but 

Then games can teach, too? Sure. 
That’s the principle behind shows like 
The Electric Company, so why not put it 
in boxes? Writing game programs for 
computers certainly has taught more 
programmers the fine points of program- 
ming than would care to admit it. Games 
include contingencies that the computer 
scientists (except those who are writing 
programs) haven’t thought of yet. I 
mean, how often does an academic text 
address the problems inherent in getting 
a box of gold out of a locked room without 
getting eaten by the dragon guarding it? 
Not often, you’ll agree. 

One of the most important things that 
intelligent games may be teaching 
borders on the subliminal — that 
computers are here, and they’re here to 
serve. By packaging them in delightful 
forms that entertain, the toy manu- 
facturers guarantee the inevitable 
acceptance of computers as part of our 
daily lives. (I said that this would be 
diabolical). Thus the expected “personal 
computer” might, for practical reasons, 
be a special purpose toy/tool rather than 
the ideal package which Steve North 
describes in his article (elsewhere in this 
issue). At least at first. Once computers 
have been accepted, who knows? Perhaps 
the specific lesson being taught by these 
games is simply computer literacy. 

% 



this should follow the path set by book 
publishing, too. Already most of the 
programs are written by a small number 
of people — at least ' in the commercial 
arena — and those authors might improve 
their financial position by using an agent. 
Royalties tend to be higher for software 
than for books (15% to 35%, as of this 
writing), but can be expected to fall as the 
industry matures. 

If your interests lie in marketing, 
rather than technical, fields, personal 
computing offers some interesting 
challenges as well. Few of the computer 
manufacturers have reached the market 
with much impact. This is partly due to 
small advertising budgets, but ignorance 
of marketing strategies and usage of 
inappropriate techniques take their tolls. 



To tomorrow’s computer marketing 
genius the field is open for development 
and implementation of brand-new 
approaches. No company has satis- 
factorily answered the question “Do we 
sell personal computers as intelligent 
calculators, incredibly flexible video 
games, or as small-business machines?” 
There are as many answers as there are 
marketers. 

The trick to planning a career that 
gets you aboard the personal computer 
bandwagon involves taking an educated 
guess as to where that wagon is headed, 
and then, in the immortal words of an 
anonymous cowboy, “Head ’em off at the 
pass!” Good luck. 

— Ed Teja 




Now in its third year of publication, 
FUTURE LIFE magazine is a colorful 
crystal ball that shows you the world of 
tomorrow — a better, more positive world 
than today. With lavish, full-color layouts, 
FUTURE LIFE explores science, medicine, 
culture, the arts and media, space 
travel — whatever the greatest minds 
of our planet can forecast. 



Harlan Ellison 



is one of those 



minds. 



His award-winning science-fiction 
stories, his TV and film scripts, 
his hard-hitting articles and 
speeches have made him one of 
the most electric voices of today. 
And now, Harlan Ellison joins 
FUTURE LIFE as a regular col- 
umnist, dissecting science-fiction 
trends and stirring up your think- 
ing about the future of life. You're 
going to love Harlan or you're 
going to hate him, because he's 
going to hit you with some ideas 
you've never thought about. 

FUTURE LIFE is Stacked in 



SPECIAL OFFER: 

Subscribe now, with this coupon, and we’ll ADD one EXTRA 
ISSUE to your term— absolutely FREEI New subecrIbeiB 
only— offer good till Sept. 30 , 1980. 

Mail cash, check or money order to: FUTURE LIFE DEPT. 3 

475 Park Ave. South 
New York. NY 10016 

Please send me one year of FUTURE LIFE (8 Issues) 
for Just $1 3.98 and Include one bonus Issue (total of 9 
Issues— 14 months) at no extra charge (newsstand 
price; over $20.00.) 



front of OMNI at your favorite 
magazine counter — or at 
Waldenbooks, but you can 
subscribe right now at substan- 
tial savings. Either way, ask for 
FUTURE LIFE, and you'll get 
Harlan Ellison inside. 



Foreign orcJers (surface mail) $20 00 U 
Foreign Air Mall Europe/S. America — add $10.50 D 
Asia, Africa. Japan — add $13 50 D 



NAJ1.1E 



ORDER TODAY 






ADDRESS 



CITY 



STATE 

Please allow 4-6 weeks for delivery of first issue 



ZIP 






18 




W E STILL CALL IT the Shubbi Arms, though the 
Dufai long ago appropriated it, of course, and 
everything else, too, the Shubbi not excluded. The 
Arms is one of the older Shubbi combs, dating from 
sometime shortly after what is commonly known as the Fat- Ass 
Takeover and well before what is privately referred to as The 
Big Joke On Them. To the Shubbi, if not the Dufai, the place 
must look classy. Its tunnelways slope around an artificial hill 
like a gasket-leak from a broken motor. 

The receptionist in the Arms’ Red Tunnel East was your 
usual Shubbi flunky, a bad-tempered bozo. He filled the 
entrance when he saw me coming and scowled: the Dufai may 
have demoted his kind when they moved in, but at least he still 
had Terrans to harass. 

“Want?” he whirred. 

I repressed a groan. The Shubbi like the idea of a universal 
language, as long as it's theirs. Theirs sounds like an aviary 
with a cat loose in it. I’m okay on the whistles, but the clicks 
and glottal stops can pave the way to a laryngectomy in a 
couple of years. 

“Want see Omlaf,” I chirped. “Him be all specting see by. 
Call now all come hurry at.” 

“Him be no by.” The Shubbi wiggled, indicating utter 
indifference. “All same go look all golly.” 

“Me do.” (What a language.) 

I followed as he pulled his bulk down the tunnel ramp. From 
behind, he looked like a small pachyderm that had been cut off 
at the knees and stuck on a broad, quivering base. The Shubbi 
are not a handsome people nor a pleasant one. The Dufai word 

ABOUT THE AUTHORS 

Steven Utley has been writing science fiction since 1972, and 
has published it in New Dimensions. Universe, Galaxy, and 
Fantasy and Science Fiction. His real love, however, is 
cartooning, an occupation to which he increasingly devotes his 
time. Howard Waldrop’s first story also appeared in 1972, in 
Analog. Since then he has appeared in Universe. Shayol, 
Galaxy, and Amazing. He conceived the original idea for “In 
the Shubbi Arms” and claims it is founded on the “apocalyptic 
visions of Stephen Foster as revealed in his songs.” 



IN THE 

SHUBBI ARMS 

by Steven Utley 
and Howard Waldrop 



for them has no phonetic equivalent in any Terran language, 
but it means approximately the same thing that Terrans call 
them: Fat-asses. 

By and by, we came to a waiting chamber and another 
flunky, who looked me over and blooted, “Come? You be here 
now?” 

“Wilson-man,” I said, and showed him the emblem on my 
purely ceremonial brief case. “Be sent for.” 

The two Shubbi tweedled at each other for a few seconds, too 
fast and too high a pitch for me to follow the dialog. Then the 
receptionist headed back for his station at the mouth of Red 
Tunnel East, and the second Shubbi told me to wait while he 
went to fetch a Dufai. 1 insincerely thanked him as he lurched 
away. It’s bad enough having to deal with flunkies; it can be a 
nightmare when some of the flunkies are big doughy toads, the 
others are big spiny blimps, and each kind would like to see the 
other kind staked out over hot coals. I nervously cooled my 
heels and calculated how much my time was going to be worth 
to Omlaf in terms of aggravation. 

A Dufai finally came clacking and scraping up the tunnel 
ramp. Now I began to get not just nervous but twitchy as well. I 
had never before bedn so close to one of them, and certainly 
never in one of their lairs. The Dufai enjoy making a show of 



19 




refinement and have been, on the whole, marginally nicer 
proprietors of the galaxy that the crude Shubbi were. The 
Shubbi, on the other hand, did not smell like bad eggs. 

“You are here to see Omlaf,” the Dufai said in passable 
German. He was not asking a question. Dufai do not ask 
questions. “First iris on the left,” and he pointed his third 
major appendage down the tunnel. The third appendage is the 
formal one; he might as well have used a pole. 

1 inclined my head ever so slightly, as one petty official to 
another, and walked down until I came to the iris bearing the 
squiggle that meant Commandant Omlaf. The iris opened. I 
took a deep breath and stepped through, into a gloomy, sour- 
smelling chamber full of the new commandant. 

1 hadn’t expected to actually see Omlaf — his predecessor, 
they had told me, always kept himself mercifully out of sight 
behind a large screen during audiences. Omlaf was big, even 
for a Dufai, at least three meters high, with a ratio of about 
two-to-one side to top. He remained spread and didn’t rise for 
me. but he did have an interested air. I tried not to gag on it. 

“You are the Wilson-man,” said Omlaf, “Your nest’s official 
representative. 1 am so frothlike that you came.” 

“How pulsing of you to have me.” I gave him a big grin. He 
quivered. The Dufai are disturbed by the thought of teeth. 



which they apparently think are uncomfortable. They really 
don’t like mouths, when you come down to it; our mouth parts 
move; we use our mouths to eat, to speak, to breathe, to make 
love; they think the whole business is vulgar. 

“You are comfortable in that erect positon.” 

“Quite,” 1 said, and thought. Surely they must have told him 
Terrans contain a good many bones. “Do not trouble yourself 
on my behalf. 1 am here to serve you.” 

Omlaf gestured with his second major appendage, his way of 
acknowledging what was already obvious, then indicated a 
silver tray balanced atop a tripod. The tray contained small 
pieces of what might have been bloody liver mixed with milk. I 
was to help myself. 

“I regret to decline,” I said. “Terran metabolisms have 
quirks.” 

“You Terries have a saying. One man’s meat is another 
man’s person.” 

“Something like that, yes.” I tried not to watch as he 
delicately scooped up some of the morsels in the cup of his 
minor appendage and popped them into some orifice or other. 
“If ever you have occasion to call me here again, I must bring 
you a sample of a rich, aromatic, Terran delicacy. It’s called 
[ Continued on page 23] 




THE COLONY 



by Raymond Kaminski 



A nts, they were everywhere. Lucy found them in 
the pantry module where the food pellets were stored, 
in the catalytic stove, even in the cherished cookie jar, 
hand cut out of a moon rock, that Dave had given her 
on their seventh anniversary. And no matter how many times 
she scoured the kitchen with the plasma vaporizer, those little 
black pests kept coming back, zig-zagging over the white, 
teflon counter like coffee grounds that had suddenly come to 
life. 

“We can shoot men into space, but we still can’t get rid of 
ordinary ants,” Lucy mumbled to herself as she chased them 
with her ultrasonic wand. The insects scurried away, lashed by 
silent vibrations in the air. But as soon as she turned her back, 
they brazenly sprinted out again. 

To Lucy, it was more than just a simple nuisance, more than 
a poor reflection on ner housekeeping, for Dave was one of 
those men who had advanced space travel so far in the last 
decade that the exploration of the solar system had been stan- 
dardized to a methodical, meticulous routine. He was now 
coordinator of a project which regularly launched voyagers to 
forage the vacuum for the knowledge and the materials the 
world needed for further progress and growth. Yet when 
she complained to him about the ants, he only smiled over the 
rim of his coffee cup and went on reading the latest report on 
his precious flights. 

The video-phone beeped persistently. Lucy ran, trying to 
answer it before it could wake Dave. He had put in another long 
night calculating the optimum reentry trajectory of Shuttle 4-11 
which was ferrying in the five astronauts returning from a flight 
beyond Pluto. Man had finally stepped out of his own backyard 
and left the solar system, like a kid crossing the street for the 
first time. The weather on earth, however, didn’t seem to 
appreciate this milestone. It refused to cooperate, and Dave 
had to sneak the shuttle through between thunderstorms. 

“Where’s Dave?j’ Otis Drew’s grey face winced across the 
screen. He looked as though he could use some rest himself. 
He always looked that way. 

“Dave’s sleeping.” Lucy tried to be firm. She knew it 
wouldn’t do any good. “He didn’t get home until dawn, you 
know.” 

“Tell him to be at Flight Control within the hour.” 

“Look, Mr. Drew. ” 

The face on the screen turned into a blizzard of grey snow. 
Otis Drew had hung up. 

Lucy dreaded waking her husband. She knew he’d jump 
right out of his sleeping capsule as soon as she told him what 



ABOUT THE AUTHOR 

Raymond Kaminski has been working as a scientific writer 
for fifteen years. Turning his hand to fiction, he has sold a 
novel to Tower Publications as well as this story to Galaxy. 
Warriors is scheduled to appear from Tower in January. 



Otis had said. But Dave had to have some rest, some time to let 
his body recuperate. He was depending too much on his 
beta-wave generator to keep him awake. It would ruin his health 
if it went on. And he hadn’t really touched her in weeks. Lucy 
wouldn’t let him. She didn’t want love kindled and kept burning 
by a brain-wave machine. Without it, Dave drifted off even 
before the preliminaries were over. He couldn’t help it. 

But Lucy did wake him. The job at Flight Control was a good 
one: it paid well and Dave seemed to enjoy the work. She made 
him drink black coffee in the hope that caffeine would make 
beta waves unnecessary. Still, it wasn’t until he stood at the 
door and his finger found the button on the small pack attached 
to his belt that the color returned to his face. Only then was he 
fully awake. 

“If you remember,” she asked him, just to have something 
to say, “try and pick up some ant traps on your way home. 
Nothing else seems to work.” 

“Sure, Honey. I won’t forget.” He gave her an absent smile, 
a quick peck on the cheek, and then he was gone. She heard the 
turbines of his car scream into life, then fade into the distance. 
Lucy knew he wouldn’t remember. 

“We were well beyond Pluto’s orbit when we made visual 
contact. I estimate the diameter of the craft to be about 50 
meters. .” Group Leader Carl Kubek lit another cigarette off 
the one he had just smoked down to a butt. He hadn’t felt this 
warmth in his lungs for the three months he had spent in space 
and he was greedy for any kind of sensory stimulation now that 
he was finally free of the sterile isolation of the space capsule. 
Normally, the Exploratory Program didn’t even consider men 
or women who were addicted to the primitive, self-destructive 
tobacco habit. But Kubek was an exceptional man, and so they 
made exceptions for him. 

“You said ‘craft’.” Dave squirmed in his seat. “Do you 
expect us to believe ... ” 

“1 don’t expect anything.” Kubek snapped back in a puff of 
smoke. “You want to hear it now or you want to wait for a 
written report?” 

“Go on, please.” Otis Drew spoke to Carl, but he. was 
looking at Dave, 

“Okay, but pardon my syntax, won’t you, fellas?” Carl 
wiped his hair back from his face, but the strands were heavy 
with sweat and they fell back down into his eyes. 

“Anyway, the craft was disc shaped, formed from a silvery, 
metallic substance. There were no external marks of identifica- 
tion. The surface was smooth, except for four hatches along the 
perimeter at intervals of 90 degrees. I suited up and went out to 
inspect it. The hatch opened easily. 1 didn’t even have to use a 
hydraulic. ” 

“1 hope you realize that you violated procedure when you left 
the ship without permission. It was unscheduled, dangerous, 
and foolish.” Dave didn’t care for the way Kubek played fast 
and loose with the rules. Procedures had been codified for good 
reasons. Everything was so much safer, neater, easier to 
handle when the men kept to the pattern, did what they were 
told. 



Tom Barrett 




22 



“Look, fella. At that distance from earth it takes over twenty- 
four hours between the time 1 transmit a message and the time 
1 receive an answer. That’s not counting the time it takes you 
guys to make up your minds. I’d still be driftin’ out there some- 
where if I had to ask for permission every time I wiped my nose. ’ ’ 
“But you put the whole project in jeopardy. Whatever this 
thing was that you found, it obviously wasn’t a natural forma- 
tion. It was manufactured and when you forced the hatch, you 
might have killed whoever was inside — or been killed 
by them!” 

“There was nobody inside.” 



“You couldn’t have known until it was too late. And we have 
only your word. .” 

“Look, are you calling me a liar?” Carl pushed himself to his 
feet. He was a big man, though his muscles were weakened 
from too much time spent in weightless space. 

But Otis stepped in between them and overruled Dave. 
“We selected Carl to head this expedition because of his 
initiative. We can’t blame him when he uses it.” 

To be contradicted by his superior in front of Kubek was like 
a slap in the face. At least it felt that way to Dave. He had to 
switch his brain-wave generator to alpha, to calm himself 
enough to go on. 

“After you breached the seal, what did you find?” 

Carl looked at Otis before he answered. 

“The craft appeared to have been designed for hauling 
cargo. There were no bulkheads, no internal fixtures. It was a 
great big container, probably was towed by a mother ship like a 
barge behind a tug. For some reason it had been abandoned. 
Maybe the mother ship developed technical problems and cut it 
loose. I have no way of knowing.” He reached for another 
cigarette, but the pack was empty. He crushed it in his hand. 
“Come on. Get to the point. What did you find inside?” 
“Well, the craft was packed with crystals — clear, brittle 
crystals like diamonds or rock candy, and they had a bluish 
tinge. I thought you boys might be interested so I brought some 
back with me.” 

“Where are they now?” 

Carl nodded in Drew’s direction. 

“In the lab. We’re trying to identify the components.” 

“1 want to see them.” 

“Of course, Dave.” Otis Drew folded his hands in front of 
him. “Will you come along with us, Carl?” 

“You couldn’t keep me away.” It sounded possessive. They 
were his discovery, after all. But when he tried to rise, he 
swooned and fell back into his chair. 



“What’s wrong?” 

“Probably just the tobacco and gravity ganging up against 
me. Takes time before you get used to either of them again.” 
Carl smiled, embarassed. “You two go on ahead. I’ll catch up 
in a minute or two.” 

As soon as he was alone, Carl sifted through the butts in the 
ashtray till he found the longest one. When he lit it, he had to 
be careful not to burn his fingers or his nose. 

D ave didn’t seem to want to talk when he came 
home. Lucy accepted his mood and braced herself for 
another night alone — for she would be alone as 
soon as Dave turned off the beta waves. 

But after they picked their way through a silent dinner, the 
story began to leak out and exasperation over Kubek’s impetu- 
ous conduct flowed into suspicions about the way Otis Drew 
had frustrated his authority. 

“You mean that we actually have proof that there are other 
people in the universe?” 

Dave couldn’t help feeling betrayed by her enthusiasm. 
“Second-hand proof. That’s all. The only solid evidence is 
the crystals. The rest is hearsay, the word of a reckless rocket 
jockey.” 

“Well, what kind of crystals are they? I mean, are they sugar 
or salt or really diamonds?” 

Dave shrugged sourly. Lucy wasn’t the only one who would 
be excited by the news. Soon a lot of people would be asking 
questions, so he might as well start getting used to answering 
them now. 

“We don’t know anything yet. Samples are being shipped to 
the top analytical labs around the world. The crystals will be 
broken down into their components, bombarded with every- 
thing from lasers to proton beams. Then the results will have to 
be correlated. Till all the data is in, we’re just whistling in the 
dark.” 

It was then that the beeping of the video-phone intruded into 
the converstaion. 

This time Otis Drew was as grey as the North Atlantic and 
the twitches on his face were white caps riding the crests of the 
waves. 

“Kubek is dead.” 

“When? What happened?” Dave’s finger automatically 
found the brain-wave generator on his belt and switched it off. 
There was more than enough adrenalin dumping into his 
system to keep him awake from here on in. 

“We don’t know. But the other members of the crew have 
fallen into comas. They must have picked up something in 
space. You better get over here. Quick!” 

Dave stood there for a second, staring into the flickering 
storm left on the screen. Then he tore out of the door. 

Lucy sighed long and hard. It was a good job, she told herself. 
Yet sometimes she wished all the commotion would go take a 
vacation. 

Then she noticed the plastic bag on the counter. She opened 
it and found ant traps. Dave had remembered. With all the 
problems on his mind, he had remembered her ant traps. Poor 
Dave. 

Lucy read the instructions, carefully pushed in the perforated 
holes around the rim of the cans and placed them at strategic 
sites around the kitchen. Foraging ants would enter the traps, 
carry the baited poison back to the nest, and soon the entire 
colony would be destroyed. 

“Even in this age of rockets and space travel when astro- 
nauts are swarming all over the universe and bringing back 
unimaginable treasures, it’s nice to know that some of the old- 
fashioned solutions still work the best.” 

Then Lucy gathered up the leftovers and stored them in the 
thermo-electric refrigerator. 



"The craft appeared to have been 
designed for hauling cargo. There were 
no bulkheads, no internal fixtures. It was 
a great big container, probably was 
towed by a mother ship like a barge 
behind a tug. For some reason it had 
been abandoned. Maybe the mother ship 
developed technical problems and cut it 
loose. 1 have no way of knowing." 



INTHESHUBBIAKMS 
[Continued from page 19] 

coffee.” 

“It sounds simply wavelike.” 

“1 wagged my head, meaning But Of Course, and gave him 
my bland smile, the one with just the lips. He’d think wavelike 
if caffeine ever got hold of his digestive system. 

“But that,” said the Dufai, “is as may be. There is a 
particular matter which must now be discussed, Wilson-man.” 

“Of course.” 

“I had hesitated to call your nest. It is my belief that a policy 
of general non-interference best serves the interest of efficient 
colonial administration. Even the fat-asses realized that after 
they had been here for a while.” Otherwise, there wouldn’t 
have been anything for the Dufai to grab away from them. 
“Leave the natives’ customs and superstitions be, don’t 
tamper with their nests and industries more than is absolutely 
necessary, and everything will run smoothly. That is the Dufai 
way. And it had always been successful. The Dufai Order, even 
before we assumed control of the Shubbi spheres of influence, 
has always been a model of efficiency. We have rarely had to 
punish anyone.” 

The chamber filled with the sinus-searing miasma of Dufai 
pride as Omlaf did what they do instead of beam and crack 
suspenders. I tried breathing very shallowly, through the fine 
crack between my still blandly smiling lips. 

“But,” Omlaf said, flicking his first major appendage, the 
one with the hollow barb and the poison sacs, “there is the 
matter of my private unit. My predecessor was unfortunately 
called away before he could explain to me the, ah, rituals, the 
protocol which your nest observes. I am baffled, Wilson-man, 
and it is starting to make me throbbing.” 

“Believe me,” I said, not taking my eyes from that twitching 
first appendage, “1 want you to know, we all appreciate the fact 
that you’re having to put up with some minor inconvenience.” 

The first appendage uncoiled and rose and curled cobra-like 
in the air between us. The Dufai seemed to study the barb for a 
moment. “It has been some time since I contacted your nest 
with regard to this unit. Meanwhile, my administration is what 
you Terries call handsprung for simple lack of it.” 

“Our people are working on it, let me assure you of that.” 

“Your nest described the installation procedure as the 
merest thing. Yet I still have no easily accessible unit in my 
own chamber. The more I am told by your nest, the less I 
comprehend.” He actually leaned toward me. It was all I could 
do to keep from jumping for the iris. The barb hovered above 
my head. “I am at twit’s end, Wilson-man. Explain to me why I 
am having so much trouble with the Terrie communications 
system. Why could I not simply have kept my predecessor’s 
unit?” 

“That would have complicated matters unduly. For 
everyone. There are records to maintain. You can’t ima — ” I 
bit that off; you don’t tell a Dufai that he can’t anything. “We 
know what we’re doing. My company, my nest, has been a 
going concern for a couple of hundred years, during which time 
procedures and policies that work have to be developed and 
refined and overhauled to the point that to tamper with them is 
to invite catastrophe. We readily admit that we make 
mistakes.” 

“Perhaps you would not make mistakes if your nest did not 
enjoy such a considerable degree of autonomy.” 

“But we explained the situation to you when you first came 
in to push out the Shubbi. And we explained it to them, too. 
And everyone agreed that our network should be integrated 
into the general system, first the Shubbi’s, then yours. And at 
the same time. Just to keep things functioning smoothly. That 
the company should continue to have a free hand. No 
interference. It had been that way before the pulsing inception 
of the Dufai Order and the Shubbi takeover, and the company 
was enormously successful. It has been that way for the past 
century, apart from fat-ass excesses during the takeover itself. 



With the result that you now have at your fingertips a network 
that — ” 

“1 have no private access to any network of your nest’s.” 

“But you will! You will! By no later than this very afternoon, 
or possibly tomorrow morning. And when you do get your unit, 
it will be yours, the one that you personally chose for yourself, 
not — I sneered and hoped that Omlaf knew it to be an 
expression of contempt — “a mere cast-off left by your 
predecessor.” 

Omlaf sighed. That stench you wouldn’t believe. “It is to be 
hoped. Desperation forces me to confide in you, a Terrie. I 
must have my private unit today, Wilson-man. 1 lose status in 
my nest each time I use another chamber.” 

“Rest assured. We’re doing all we can for you.” 

“You are pulsing,” said the spiny bag of blubber, ’’for a 
Terrie.” 

“Where the Dufai sits, can a Terrie not be far away?” 

That remark apparently made some sense to him, anyway. 
He finally sat back or settled down or in any case drew away 
from me, and the first appendage coiled itself in his quasi-lap, 
and I just barely repressed a shudder of relief. No degree of 
training can quite prepare you for the sight of a Dufai barb as it 
looks for nice soft spots in your pate. 

“You will pardon my throbbing,” Omlaf said. The Dufai do 
not really make requests, either. 

“1 appreciate the strain which you baleens — ” 

“I do not know that word.” 

“It’s a word from a dead but still-honored Terran language. 
Great big ones.” 

“Bah leens. Very wavelike, Wilson-man. I shall encourage 
its use.” 

He waved the second appendage. I had been dismissed. 

Desperately resisting the urge to laugh out loud, 1 gave him a 
respectful nod and backed toward the iris. As soon as I was 
through and the portal had closed, I went up the ramp at just 
under a trot, darting past surly but awkward Shubbi messenger 
boys and, as I neared the mouth of Red Tunnel East, all but 
impaling myself on a, fortunately, bottom-caste spiny 
whale — baleens, for God’s sake, great big ones! — who took a 
swing at me with his de-barbed appendage. Then I was out of 
the Shubbi Arms. I quickly put as much distance between 
myself and the place as 1 could before I had to sit down and 
absolutely break up. 

Bah leens! Very wavelike, Wilson-man! I howled. I rocked. I 
shall encourage its use! My God! 

I had done it, I thought, cackling, crying, pounding my 
thighs with my fists, my very first real penetration mission, and 
I had pulled it off to perfection, and never mind that Omlaf was 
new to Earth and couldn’t tell when his tentacle was being 
tugged. Never mind that spooky first appendage, either. Oh, 
he would get his unit, finally, for sure, but it would make him 
more throbbing than not having it, we would see to that as we 
saw to everything else. The Dufai had the run of the place for 
two, three decades, and the Shubbi for several more before 
them, and in all of that time they had, neither of them caught 
on. 

Oh, and sure, I felt very patriotic and brave and all, a true 
descendant of the generation that had tried to match hardware 
with the Shubbi. But what really counted for me as I sat 
laughing and helplessly shaking my head was that I had gone 
right down into the midst of the bastards and shucked 01’ 
Massa Dufai, just as my parents and grandparents had shucked 
or Massa Shubbi after all the hardware was gone and only The 
Big Joke On Them was left. I had upheld the traditions of both 
my family and the company. We Wilsons have been members 
of the resistance since the first gloating fat-ass came waddling 
and slurching down the gangplank. And as for the other, well, 
hell, nobody’s ever licked the phone company. 

% 



24 



THE 

NIGHT MACHINE 

by Dona Vaughn 



T he government provided a military hover 

large enough to hold Alec in his hos-suit to take him to 
his home and all of them, even the emergency crew on 
the hover, expected him to be dead when they opened 
the doors. To their surprise, he was not. 

Dyane, standing at the doorway to supervise the hero’s 
homecoming, felt a momentary chill as she remembered the 
indomitable, unconquerable will that was Alec Roche. But one 
look at his face and the hesitant movements of his chest 
reassured her. She had loved him so much that his leaving 
crushed the life out of her. Now she was a different 
woman — regrettably colder and perhaps more cruel — but 
blessedly different, and he no longer had the power to move 
her one way or the other. 

She had set aside the largest bedroom for him, the one that 
had been his in the dim past when they were together, but his 
eyes remained closed and he was not aware of that small favor. 
The emergency crew slipped him out of the hos-suit and 
connected him to the robo-nurse before they left. Looking down 
at him. Dyane thought that it was the robo-nurse, not Alec 
which caused the faint, erratic rise and fall of his chest. 

Only a small group of friends, hers, had followed them from 
Intercon IV. Ten or fifteen of them crowded into Alec’s room 
with her and another fifteen or so roamed the house, changing 
places occasionally with the ones in the room. All of them felt 
it necessary to pat her on the shoulder and murmur, “Poor 
Dyane,’’ when they passed, until finally her shoulder began to 
ache and she was sure she would scream at the very next 
person who came near her. 

But the next person was Saundra who handed her a drink and 
from the very first sip Dyane knew that Mikkel had been up to 
his old tricks and spiced it with something truly lovely that gave 
her a wonderful feeling of oneness with the universe and an 
urgent desire to love and be loved in all the varied ways she and 
her friends had discovered over the years. 



ABOUT THE AUTHOR 

Dona Vaaghn’s fiction has appeared in Galileo and Galaxy. 
She is a native of Texas and takes a lot of pride in her family — a 
husband and two children. Her free time is taken up with 
gardening and target shooting, which must keep down the 
rodents in the garden. 



Then Saundra gasped and Val cried, “Look!” pointing at the 
robo-nurse. Dyane’s beautiful feeling splintered and was gone. 
Alec’s terrible eyes were open at last and he was looking 
around the room, gazing deeply, as only Alec could, into each 
of their faces. She followed his gaze around the room, looking 
into each of their faces as he did, and saw what he saw: their 
calm, matter-of-fact acceptance of his death. 

He closed his eyes and someone murmured, “He’s gone, 
poor thing.” 

Dyane could only sob, pointing to his chest, pointing at the 
thing no one else saw — the suddenly firm and regular rhythm 
of his breathing. She brushed them all aside and went to bed 
alone for the first night since he had left her a hundred years 
before. 

• • 

Alec swam up out of a haze of pain and saw the faces dancing 
in the mist before him. As they became clearer, they became 
fewer. Finally he understood that as he improved, the watchers 
vanished. 

It was agony for him to lie in the arms of the robo-nurse. 
When the telltales indicated he was getting stronger, the 
exerciser circuit was activated and his limbs underwent the 
further agony of mechanical movement. 

Once he dreamed that the governor of Earth had come into 
his room and looked down at him lying there with the 
robo-nurse pumping his limbs up and down for him as though 
he were some sort of frantic machine himself. The governor 
had spoken to someone just out of sight. “There are some 
things that robos can’t do and that was one of them. When he 
crawled into the hold of that ship, he saved the lives of seven 
thousand people.” The governor sighed. “It was an honor to 
ship him back to the planet of his birth. A very great honor.” 
He paused as if waiting for a response. None came. “Everyone 
thought he would die. You understand that. They would not 
have done it if they could have guessed what kind of man he is. 
If they had known. ..You understand...” The governor’s voice 
trailed off into silence. Then, in a completely different tone, 
“Who will tell him?” 

“1 will.” Dyane’s voice floated out of some unseen corner of 
the room, and in it there was a minute trace of something that 
could only be detected by someone who had been as close to 
her as Alec had been a hundred years before. Triumph. Just a 
trace. Then it was gone. “I will be the one.” 

After that he was not sure what was conciousness and what 
was not. The frantic pumping of his arms and legs seemed to go 
on eternally, even in his sleep, permeating every dream but 
one, that of the night machine. 

He had not dreamed of the night machine since he was a 
child, but now he dreamed of it constantly. The night machine 
had been, in reality, the vast machinery in the basement of the 
self-contained apartment house in which he had spent his 
childhood, the machinery tiiat purified the apartment dwellers’ 
waste and returned it to them in usable forms. But he had not 
known that when he first saw it as a four year old. The vast 
clanging machinery haunted his dreams for weeks. He had 
seen it as a masticator of men and he knew then as he knew 
now that when he died he would go into the night machine to 
reappear later in another form — purified, improved perhaps — 
but changed; and it was the change, the loss of the uniqueness 
that was himself, that he feared more than the physical fact of 
death. 

• • 

He woke one morning to a clear, cold conciousness of self 
that left no question as to what was dream and what was real, 
and while he might have teethmarks on his soul, the night 
machine would have to wait a little longer. 

There was a soft sound, a whisper of movement beside him. 
He turned his head and saw Dyane. He felt his lips shaping into 
a smile. “Dyane...” 

She shook her head to ward off whatever he might say next. 
“Leo has been calling to check on you. He would like to see you 



Cortney Skinner 



as soon as you feel like it.” 

“Tell him, this afternoon,” Alec said. “You can unhook me 
from this thing now.” 

Another woman might have protested. Another woman 
would not have known Alec so well. If he had said he could 
survive without the robo-nurse’s ministrations, then he could. 
She unhooked him without comment and stepped back, not 
offering him a hand, as he sat up for the first time since he had 
come home to Earth. 

She stood quietly, waiting, and after a long moment, he 
stood up. With the slow, shuffling steps of a very old man, he 
walked to the window. He braced himself against the wall and 
examined the stranger’s reflection in the glass before him. 
“I’m better than I was.” 

“Yes.” 

He could sense that she was waiting, catlike, to pounce on 
something. “This time when I leave — ” 

“1 thought you were gone for good. We agreed on that. My 
life is arranged. And now you’ve come back — ” She took a deep 
breath. “1 don’t fit into our old patterns anymore,” she went on 
quietly, trembling with anger contained. “I’ve changed. I’ve 
changed, but you haven’t.” 

“It’s only for a little while,” he said patiently, not 
understanding, not yet. “Only until I get my strength back. 
Then I’ll be gone and you’ll have your life back, just the way it 
was.” Her expression did not change. “After I’m gone — ” 

“You’re not going. You will never be strong enough to leave 
Earth. They would not have brought you back if they had 
realized you were going to live. They didn’t know you. Alec. 
Not like I do.” 

“When 1 get stronger,” he said, hearing her words, but not 
assimilating them, not yet, “I’ll leave and then you’ll — ” 

“No.” 

“1 don’t — ” 

“You’re a prisioner of gravity. You’ll live, but your body will 
never again be strong enough to survive the lift off from 
Earth.” 

He continued to look at her, still not comprehending, until he 
saw the tears shining in her cheeks and then, finally, he 
understood. No matter how long and how hard he fought, the 
way to the stars was closed to him. Forever. 



25 









Leo Brandon came at four. 

He had been the only person on Earth gratified to hear that 
Alec Roche’s flame was not extinguished. Since that was a 
manifestly unpopular view, he had kept it to himself and. 









26 



He limped over to the table to examine 
the choice she had left him. The 
reflection of his own hand reached out to 
him as he picked up the knife. He 
switched it on and ran the edge of the 
beam carefully along his thumb. A long 
thin sliver of flesh curled away and 
floated down to the tabletop. It would be 
over so quickly and then there would be 
no more pain. He could no longer 
remember what life had been like 
without pain. 

fingers crossed, he had dreamed. Now he would see whether 
those dreams could stand the light of day. 

He let himself in. 

The sounds of music and laughter drifted down from the 
rooftop gardens, but the house itself was empty and echoing. 

He found Dyane just leaving Alec’s room. When she saw him, 
she closed the door gently behind her and leaned against it. 
looking pale, fragile, and unutterably weary. 

“He knows?” Leo asked. 

“He knows.” 

“And he accepts it?” 

“When has he ever accepted anything?” she said bitterly 
and walked away. 

For a moment Leo allowed his emotions free rein. Then, with 
an effort, he smoothed away the grin and composed his face 
into the proper lines for visiting one’s best friend on his 
deathbed and went inside. 

When he saw the crippled old man standing beside the 
window, he thought he was in the wrong room. Then the man 
turned and he realized it was Alec. 

“I should have died out there,” Alec said, bv way of 
greeting. He limped back to the robo-nurse and sat down. 

“Everyone expected you to. They would not have brought 
you back otherwise. You have to understand, Alec. They were 
not being cruel. They simply did not understand you.” 

“And what do I do now?” 

“You make a life for yourself, 1 suppose. As best you can.” 

“I’ve been thinking. ..a clone, perhaps, and a memory 
transfer...” 

“You haven’t really kept up with the news from home, have 
you Alec?” Leo said gently. 

“What news?” 

“Why, the news that we are in perfect balance here on 
Earth. TTie population is completely under control. Of course, it 
has required a lot of hardship. A lot of personal sacrifice. 
There is always a hardcore majority that will not leave a planet, 
no matter how crowded it gets. And of course with our 
lengthened life span — we simply had to adopt certain 
restrictions... You do understand?” 

“Cloning?” 

“Is illegal. 1 am sorry, Alec. If they could change the law for 
anyone, they would do it for you. The governor himself told me 
so.” 

“But there are other places off Earth where — ” 

“They could fix you up in no time. ..If you could get there. 
But you can’t get there, Alec.” 

Alec lay back and let the robo-nurse’s arms snake around 



him. He closed his eyes. 

“I’ll be back,” Leo said. 

Alec said nothing. 

• • 

He woke to the sounds of music and laughter and he realized 
he had been hearing the same sounds in the background day 
and night since consciousness returned, the noise of Dyane’s 
perpetual party. He stirred and the robo-nurse subsided. 

Someone had thoughtfully left a cane and a robo-chair by the 
door. He chose the cane and limped down the hall toward the 
music and laughter. 

Forty people filled the circular mainroom and in the center of 
the room on a mirrored tabletop, Dyane lay naked. Leaning 
over her was a tall, thin man who with skillful hands was 
embroidering fantastic sketches on her skin with a laserneedle. 

She of all the crowd saw Alec in the doorway. “Come and 
watch.” she cried. “I’m having my life story written on my 
skin.” 

Alec limped closer. The tall thin man was sketching a 
woman’s face on the soft mound of Dyane’s left breast. “My 
mother,” she said. “I’m saving my labia for my father.” The 
woman’s face blossomed in brilliant line under the artist’s 
hands. “I’m tired of the past and I find this old skin is too tight. 
I’m going to get a new one soon and I wanted to get the 
maximum use out of this one before 1 shed it.” She laughed 
until the artist hissed at her to be still. 

Alec saw then that there was no place in her life for him. One 
more doorway closed before him. The options were narrowing. 
He watched the needle skipping across her flesh for a few 
moments and then limped back to the robo-nurse to think it 
over. 

• • 

When he finally slept the night machine crunched and 
rumbled so hungrily through his dreams that he woke again in 
a cold sweat, bringing the robo-nurse back to life. 

He lay quiet, passively accepting its ministrations until 
sometime in the early morning hours when the party swirled 
out of the house and swept on to livelier places. He shook off 
the robo-nurse and, leaning heavily on the cane, limped down 
the hall to the mainroom. On the mirrored table where Dyane 
had lain, there was a knife. He knew Dyane had left it for him. 
She had known where his thoughts would take him — hoped 
perhaps that he would choose that route. The means lay within 
his grasp. She had gone no further than that. 

He limped over to the table to examine the choice she had 
left him. The reflection of his own hand reached out to him as 
he picked up the knife. He switched it on and ran the edge of 
the beam carefully along his thumb. A long thin sliver of flesh 
curled away and floated down to the tabletop. It would be over 
so quickly and then there would be no more pain. He could no 
longer remember what life had been like without pain, the pain 
of his poor battered body and now the other, inner, pain, that 
tortured him when he thought of the stars, forever beyond his 
reach. But just as he had been unable to give into death in one 
form, he was unable to give into it in another. He would fight 
against the night machine even if it meant two hundred more 
years of pain and struggle before he succumbed. 

With infinite care, he replaced the knife on the mirrored 
tabletop and turned away. From behind him somewhere, he 
heard a long, low sigh and he turned in time to see a flash of 
iridescent tattooed skin disappearing into the garden room. He 
waited a few moments and when she did not reappear, he went 
back to the robo-nurse’s arms. 



I N THE MORNING LEO BRANDON came again, 
whistling in a particularly lighthearted way Alec 
found so irritating that it alone would have drawn him 
back from the grave. “It’s time you were up and 



about,” Leo told him. “You’ve got to come and see my 
babies.” 

“Babies?” 

“That’s what I call them. You haven’t even asked me what 
I’m working on.” 

Anything, Alec thought, to keep him from whistling. “All 
right, what are you working on?” 

“A zoo,” said Leo and chuckled like a madman. 

Leo’s zoo consisted of rows and rows of ampules in a liquid 
nitrogen freezer. “They’re part of the package for the 
Andromeda Probe, the cells of all Earth’s creatures — except 
man.” Leo grinned. “But he will be represented too. 1 have 
permission, unofficial of course, to pick up human cells off 
planet for two cloned volunteers when 1 collect the rest of the 
package.” 

Alec leaned heavily on his cane, staring at the freezer. “I’m 
afraid I don’t quite understand.” 

“You haven’t heard about the Andromeda Probe? It’s been 
planned for the past ten years!” 

Alec thought of muscles and bones strained beyond 
endurance and the terrifying knowledge that seven thousand 
lives depended on him. “It must have slipped my mind,” he 
said mildly. 

“Yes, well, it’s a purely scientific venture to explore the M31 
galaxy — ” 

“Two million light years away. .Are you sure we’ll still be 
here when the results come in?” 

“1 have to assume someone will.” For once, Leo was quite 
serious. “I believe in Man. I always have.” He reddened 
slightly and hurried on. “The probe’s computer will carry out 
mechanical scans first, and on the basis of that, decide at what 
point to start the cloning and educating of the volunteers.” His 
eyes sparkled. “Can you imagine it? Two humans with a life 
span of five hundred years and the best equipment our 
civilization can furnish and a whole new galaxy will be theirs to 
explore. If they find no life they can seed selected planets for 
us.” 

“Us?” 

“We’ll be there eventually. Man always pushes outward. It’s 
his nature.” 

“Why only two humans? Why not enough to establish a 
colony?” 

“We wouldn’t want to meet ourselves when we get there, 
especially not with that much lead time. Look how much trouble 
we’ve had rooting out entrenched colonies in our own Galaxy. 
Let’s hope Andromeda holds something a little less dangerous 
than humans.” He chuckled like a maniac. “But what do we 
care about that? You and I will be long gone by then.” 

• • 

When Alec returned home, the house was still empty. No 
doubt the party was continuing elsewhere with Dyane at its 
center, but Alec was left alone with his thoughts. When he 
slept, the night machine was back in his dreams, but this time 
instead of something that longed to devour him, it was a 
fantastic steed that he rode across great distances into another 
universe. 

In the morning he called Leo. “Feeling better, are we?” Leo 
said. “How about lunch?” 

Leo picked him up, took him to a remote beach, and floated 
him out on an air skid half a mile from shore, before he turned 
on a damping device and said, “Nice day we’re having, isn’t 
it.” 

“You know what I want, Leo.” 

“1 know.” 

“Can you do it?” 

“Certainly!” 

“How soon?” 

“As close to departure time as possible. Once I’m off Earth 
we can’t be stopped. I leave May 31st. You come to my zoo on 
the 30th and I’ll give you another tour.” 



27 

Before they floated back to shore, Leo said, “After that, this 
body won’t matter, you know.” 

Alec understood. Leo was telling him it was all right to give 
up once he had donated the cells and the tapes. “I’ll bring you 
something afterwards,” Leo said and Alec was grateful to him. 

There was the problem of the law. They had the tacit 
approval of the governor, but at the slightest hint of publicity 
that would vanish. The punishment for illegal cloning was 
death. After Leo and his zoo were safely off Earth, it wouldn’t 
matter, but until then Alec had to be very careful. 



Dyane came back to the house minus the party and took to 
watching him like a curious cat. She wore no clothes in the 
house and he grew used to the iridescent flash of skin that 
announced her presence. 

He was glad when he awoke on the morning of the 29th and 
found that another party was underway. That would take 
Dyane’s mind off him. He dozed in the sun and gathered his 
strength. Sometimes the party swirled into the garden around 
him and he didn’t even notice as he dreamed of galaxies 
beyond reach. 

He went to bed early that night. The robo-nurse, no longer 
activated, surrounded him like a silent metal guardian, and he 
slept peacefully for once with no dreams to disturb him. He 
woke to find that the night machine had come to life in the 
beautiful gold light of dawn and was holding him fast in its 
steel embrace. 

Dyane stood by the door, watching him. 

“Let me out of this,” he said calmly. 

“I know what you’re planning to do. You haven’t considered 
the consequences to me, have you? You’ll be dead and I’ll be 
under suspicion... They ’ll restrict my movements and my 
friends will desert me and you don’t even care. You don’t think 
of me. You didn’t think of me when you left before. You. .” 

She turned to hide her face. He stopped trying the 
strength of the robo-nurse’s arms and considered her back. 
“You could have come with me.” 

“1 couldn’t,” she cried and ran out of the room, leaving him 
a captive. 

He began again, methodically, to try his strength, and he 
wondered for the first time why she had not accompanied him a 
century before. 

The robo-nurse had not been programmed for violent 
patients. He beat and battered at it with his body until its parts 
buckled and unlatched and then he lay in its ruins trying to 
gather strength that was no longer there. Finally he gave up 
and simply rolled out of the robo-nurse’s remains and onto the 
floor. He lay where he had fallen until he knew if he lay there a 
second longer, he would never move again. 

He began slowly, painfully, to inch his body toward the door. 
Time was passing, a lot of it, and it seemed to his weary eyes 
that he was no closer to the door. Somewhere in the distance he 
heard the soft pinging of the triphone and he knew that Leo was 
trying to reach him, wondering if he had changed his mind at 
the last moment, and knowing he would not. 

And then he forgot Leo. forgot that other promised future 
self, forgot everything except that he had to crawl through the 
doorway ahead; forgot everything except the pain, pain, pain, 
pain, pain of muscles stretched beyond endurance and still 
functioning. Nothing, not even the iridescent flash of skin, 
registered until he felt the salty drops running down his face 
and knew that he was laying on his back. He knew then that he 
had made the ultimate effort, had called every ounce of 
strength out of his body, ravaged it for everything it held, and 
everything was not enough. He was laying on his back and the 
doorway was forever beyond his reach, like the stars 
themselves. 

Then he realized that the salty tears running down his cheeks 
were not his own but Dyane’s and that she was cradling his 
head in her lap. “All right, all right, you utter and complete 
[Continued on page 39] 



28 




IN THE DAYS OF 
THE STEAM WARS 



by Eugene Potter 
and Larry Blamire 



What is considered by many to be the most decisive 
development in the history of steam warfare took place in 1895 
when military engineers in the Republic of Normandy 
discovered the traction-bearing drive. Until that time, the size 
of the steam rig itself was limited by the precision with which 
its drive gears could be machined. Small imperfections in gear 
teeth create noisy vibrations when teeth mesh at high power 
and speeds. The result can be debilitating noise for the crew as 
well as an unstable drive system liable to breakdowns. Until the 
discovery of traction- bearings, experiments with rigs larger 
than ninety-five feet led to damaged gears and broken crews. 

While traction-bearings solved the mechanical problems 
inherent in the construction of truly large steam rigs, the fuel 
problem remained. A larger rig requires numerous coaling 
stations, effectively obviating the possibility of overland 
invasion into enemy territory. It was a remarkable confluence 
of circumstances, then, when the Norman steam works 
produced the first oil-fired steam engine in the same year the 
new drive system was developed. In one stroke, the Norman 
steam forces acquired a rig much larger than any seen before 
which was also capable of extended forays overland. 

— Samuel Ellicot Morrison 
from A Concise History of Steam Warfare 
on the North American Continent. 



ABOUT THE AUTHORS 

Artist Larry Blamire is well known to readers of Galileo. He 
acts with the Boston Shakespeare Company when he is not 
painting and he is keenly interested in filmmaking. He was the 
original creator of the Steam Wars. Eugene Potter has had 
short stories published in Galileo. He claims to have gotten 
involved with Larry’s Steam Wars project because he always 
wanted to combine his interests in science fiction and history. 



30 



At the compound the carnage was awful . Confusion reigned among the 
demoralized Americans. Bodies lay everywhere and the scene was a mess of 
flying limbs, scalding blasts of escaping steam, and sheer terror. Here and there a 
crewman sought refuge among the buildings, only to be crushed as the structures 
collapsed, one by one. 



L owell is situated at the junction of two major 
rail lines and occupies a bend in the Merrimack River. 
It is the site of the regional service facility for the 
United States Steam Forces, Fort Salmon P. Chase. 
To the north there are low hills, then the border of Nouvelle- 
Normandie just two miles away. To the south there are even 
lower hills, then metropolitan Boston, resting in the center of a 
geological basin. 

On October 12, 1897, the peace of the normally placid 
countryside was shattered by the appearance of the largest 
steamrig ever known on the North American continent. The 
l50-foot man-shaped machine appeared in the hills to the 
north, indiscriminately smashing barns, houses, stone fences, 
and trees as it trundled through the small farms which cover 
the landscape in that part of New England. 

The locals knew the great machine was making for the Chase 
steam works. Even if the fort had been heavily guarded (and it 
was not), it is hard to believe the U.S. steam forces would have 
had anything to stand up to this Norman juggernaut. 

Nobody expected an attack from the northern countryside. 
American steam forces were guarding the coastal highway at 
Ipswich, fifteen miles east. The Americans were unprepared 
for either an overland attack or an assault by a steamrig 150 
feet high. 

An occasional farmer would bring out a loaded rifle and fire 
at the advancing behemoth, but it was hopeless. A lucky shot 
through the “eye” might have wounded one of the two pitots or 
perhaps even the captain. But, faced with such an enormous 
destructive machine, not even the doughty New England 
farmer had the nerve to stand fast and aim his rifle properly. 

The Norman machine slowed, however, within a mile of the 
Chase steam works while its captain surveyed the compound. 

He stroked his short elegant beard thoughtfully and 
half-turned to the young officer who stood at wide stance 
attention behind him. 

“A moi ces jumelles," he said. “Toss me those field 
glasses.” 

The young man nodded and handed him the field glasses, 
then took the mouthpiece of the speaking tube from its hook on 
the ornate cabin wall. 

“Toute halte, ” said the captain. “Full stop.” 

“Toute halte,” repeated the lieutenant into the speaking 
tube. 

The enormous rig took another ponderous “step” and 
halted, its great six cylinder reciprocating engine chuffing at 
idle belowdecks. 

The landscape before the four men in the lofty cabin stopped 
rocking and the captain scanned the five brick buildings of the 
Chase compound with his field glasses. The facility consisted of 
a depot, a small fabrication plant (nothing like the one in 
Montreal), two hangars, and administrative offices, all low 
brick buildings with few windows and substantial-looking 
architecture in a military style. 

Three American rigs stood in and about the compiound, small 
protection for an important military installation. The largest of 
them was fifty feet tall. The other two, lightly-armed one-man 
walkers, were only twenty feet high with armament limited to 
single Maxim machine guns. Another rig (which would have 
been fifty feet high, had it been standing) was under repairs 



and rested in great, helpless pieces before one of the hangars. 

There were signs of activity in the compound, evidence that 
the Americans bestirred themselves from the shock of their 
first look at R.N. V. Colosse defer. Smoke began to billow from 
the shoulder stacks of the largest American rig. It made 
tentative movements, as if in drill and slowly — in a complicated 
series of maneuvers — turned to face the Norman machine. 

"Nous sommes d portee de ce vapeur Id, ” said the captain. 
“We are within range of that rig.” He turned again to the 
lieutenant. "Commencez!" he said. “Fire away!” 

"Commencez!” repeated the young man into the speaking 
tube. 

The titan’s ten inch chest gun coughed a single tracer over 
the mile separating the enormous rig from its target. The tracer 
landed short, taking a corner from the steam hangar in the 
foreground and raining bricks over the dismantled rig on the 
pavement. There was a pause while the Norman gunner made 
adjustments, then the cannon opened up again. Two exploding 
charges went wide of the American rig, reducing half the depot 
to rubble. The third shot — after another pause — found its mark 
and halved the American rig at its “waist.” Orange smoke 
surged skyward as its magazine detonated. 

"A discretion, ” said the captain. “At will.” 

The lieutenant repeated the orders behind him and the 
captain studied the scene ahead. At the compound the carnage 
was awful. Confusion reigned among the demoralized 
Americans. Bodies lay everywhere and the scene was a mess of 
flying limbs, scalding blasts of escaping steam, and sheer 
terror. Here and there a crewman sought refuge among the 
buildings, only to be crushed as the structures collapsed, one 
by one. A marine platoon leader, looking splendid in his blue 
jacket, attempted to get his detachment in formation, but his 
shouts could not be heard over the roar of the shells and 
exploding charges. He was killed in the first three minutes by 
shrapnel. 

In the relaxed and comfortable control cabin of the Norman 
monster, the captain studied the firing pattern of his barely 
competent gun crew. "Expediez le vite!” he snapped. “Finish 
it off quickly!” He watched the shells from his rig’s other guns 
strike the low buildings, knocking chunks of brick from them. 
The exploding shells of the big chest gun, however, 
accomplished most of the destruction. 

The big cannon in the rig’s central cabin was capable of 
firing twenty rounds in a minute. Even so, it took the 
inexperienced Norman gun crew a half hour to completely 
flatten the steam works. The drift on a projectile from a ten inch 
shell is only two and a half yards over the course of a mile, and 
deviation is less than two yards in a ten-mile wind. But the 
Norman guns continuously struck wide or short. 

Nevertheless the explosive power of the Norman’s guns 
made up for the incompetence of the gun crew. A near miss 
inevitably destroyed the rig’s target anyway. The first mission 
of Republique de Normandie Vapeur Colosse de Per was 
shaping up as a success. 

Never having fired a shot in return, the Chase steam yard 
was completely destroyed. The two walkers were dismembered 
and buried in the wreckage. The large rig under repair was less 
than scrap metal, and black smoke enveloped everything. 

"En avant, " said the Norman captain. “Forward.” 



"En avant, " echoed the lieutenant into the speaking tube. 

The Norman’s guns stopped. The great machine's engine 
rumbled as it built steam to move the great “legs.” 

"Quatre degris d droit, ” said the captain. “Four degrees to. 
the right.” He waited to hear the lieutenant repeat the order 
into the speaking tube. "Vers Boston, " he said. 

Corporal Frederick Winchendon was aware that an order to 
find errant Gunnery Sergeant Tom Service amounted to an 
order to prowl all the bars in Gloucester. He silently cursed hii 
superiors for forcing him to abandon his work on the U.S,S. 
Javelin's right arm and took up the job of searching for a man 
he knew was not worth finding. He would have preferred to 
finish tearing down the “shoulder” set to examine that 
bearing. He was convinced he could repair the bearing himself, 
if only the captain would give him a chance to examine it. 
Instead, he found himself walking from bar to bar and tavern to 
tavern. He finally discovered the “gunny” alone at a table in a 
dingy place on the Gloucester waterfront. 

You can’t just drag a man out of a bar on a Saturday evening. 
Even a drunken lout like Service deserved the courtesy of being 
allowed to finish his drink, so Winchendon sat quietly while the 
sergeant took great gulps from a tumbler of whiskey and tried 
to explain steam strategy to the serious-fninded corporal. If 
there were any chance of actually learning strategy from the 
bleary-eyed gunny, Winchendon would have hung on the 
man’s every word. But he dismissed the whole one-sided 
discussion as so much drunken rambling. He gazed wistfully 
toward the door of the bar, hoping Service might somehow 
remain in a condition equal to walking back to the Gloucester 
train station after he finished his interminable last drink. 

His gaze was interrupted, however, by the appearance of 
three men approaching their table. They wore the dark blue 
wool frocks of the U.S. Revenue Cutter Service and they carried 
themselves like Gloucester locals. They swaggered a little. 

“Well, well, well,” said one of the sailors menacingly, while 
he dropped his glowing cigarette and ground it out on the 
barroom floor. He was looking at one of his companions, a 
bearded brute of a man, when he said, “Do we have the honor 
of entertaining the steam forces tonight?” 

Service broke off his monologue on the strategic 
insignificance of the coastal highway. The two steam crewmen 
stood up from their small table. 

“At your service, sir,” slurred the sergeant good-naturedly 
and adjusted his neck kerchief. “Gunnery Sergeant Tom 
Service, the chest gun of the U.S.S. Javelin. " 

Winchendon didn’t say anything. He didn’t want trouble 
from the Revenue sailors, but he didn’t want to be friendly with 
them, either. 

“ And what part of the steam man do you run? ” said the third 
sailor to Winchendon. 

“Excuse me,” said Service, smiling. “We don’t call it a 
steam man. We call it a steamrig.” 

The third sailor looked at Service. “And what part of the 
steam man do you run?” he repeated. 

“You can tell by looking at him,” interrupted the bearded 
monster — and at this. Service took a surprisingly steady step 
toward the sailors — “He’s the prick.” The sailors all began to 
laugh. And they laughed so hard that they weren’t prepared for 
the apparently drunk Service to pick up a nearby chair and club 
the bearded man with it. 

Winchendon knew instantly that he had no recourse but to 
fight. Falling easily into the hand-to-hand movements that he 
had learned so recently in basic training, he belted one of the 
sailors with a double-handed blow to the temple and kicked the 
only one who had remained standing. At that point, however, 
the one Service had clubbed staggered to his feet and prepared 
to face off with the corporal, who raised his fists. 

Then two things happened. The number of Revenue sailors 
increased by six or eight (Winchendon didn’t have the presence 
of mind to count them) and Tom Service disappeared. 



Winchendon punched and kicked valiantly for a few seconds, 
but there were so many of the sailors that he could not prevent 
himself from being pinioned. He tried vainly to get his foot 
behind the leg of his captor and he had a few anguished 
instants of realization as he saw a line beginning to form in 
front of him. 

The sailor at the front of the line bowed comically to 
Winchendon. 

“Prick,” he said, “I would like you to meet the man who has 
the first whack at punching your guts out.” He turned and 
made a gesture to the large blond-bearded creature beside 
him. “This here,” he said, “is the Chief Stoker of the Revenue 
Cutter Quincy." He turned back toward Winchendon. 
“Chief,” he said. “This here’s the prick of one of the steam 
men from Ipswich.” 

Then the burly stoker stepped toward Winchedon and began 
to punch him alternately in the head and stomach. 

The young corporal remained conscious long enough to hear 
one of the sailors say, “Come on, now. Chief, give the rest of us 
a chance.” 

I T IS ELEVEN BLOCKS FROM the Gloucester Police 
Station to the city limits. Winchendon would have 
preferred to walk — or limp — the distance in silence. 
But Gunnery Sergeant Service, having secured the 
corporal’s release from jail, seemed inclined to conversation. 

He looked at Winchendon as the young armsman struggled 
to keep up with him on the uneven brick pavement. 

“You look a sight. ' said the sergeant. “Maybe you’ll look 
bad enough for the captain to take pity on you. He’s not too 
happy about diverting to Gloucester.” 

Winchendon was preoccupied with his pains, but he 
managed to summon enough concentration to look back at the 
sergeant while he limped along. 

“Where did you go?” he asked. 

“The captain,” said Service sympathetically, “said he would 
contact the Paymaster about making deductions from your pay 
as soon as we get to Lowell.” 

“Deductions?” croaked Winchendon. 

“Captain put up the damages to get the innkeeper to drop 
the charges. He intends to get the money back.” 

“Didn’t you tell him it wasn’t my fault?” 

“Corporal,” said Service. “It doesn’t matter whose fault it 
was. When you bust up a bar, you pay for the privilege. I know. 

1 busted up plenty of them in my time.” 

“Sergeant,” said Winchendon. “You started that fight. 1 
didn’t have anything to do with it.” 

“They sure were beating you up like you had something to 
do with it,” said Service. 

Just then they caught sight of the Javelin’s torso, towering 
above the houses along Washington Street. It looked like some 
mythological giant guarding the town. Wisps issued from its 
shoulder stacks and the two of thpm could just make out some 
of the crewman idling behind railings just below the 
machine’s “head.” Winchendon saw his friend Stevens at the 
very top of the rig’s “helmet.” He could not see what he was 
doing, but assumed he was polishing the six-pounder which he 
operated so effectively at the target range in Ipswich. The 
ninety-five foot rig was altogether a picture of calm inactivity. 
“Why are we shipping to Lowell?” said Winchendon. 
“Maintenance,” said Service. “Captain decided to report a 
week early because of the bearing in the right arm.” He tisked 
sympathetically. “1 hope he doesn’t blame that on you, too. 
Corporal.” 

Winchendon groaned. “Is the coastal highway secure?” he 
said. 

“ ‘Is the highway secure?’ ” said the gunnery sergeant, 
grinning. “Are we taking up that strategy now. Corporal? We 
aren’t any good at beating up Revenue sailors, is that it?” 
“Don’t push me. Sergeant,” said Winchendon. 

“Settle down, boy,” said Service. “You’re in no shape to 
back up any threats. I’ll answer your question, though. 7 don’t 



32 



think the coastal highway is secure. They still have the Talos 
and the Washington, but I think there could be an attack any 
time. That’s what I was explaining to you last night when we 
were interrupted.” 

“The Normans wouldn't attack during peace negotiations.” 

“Peace negotiations don’t mean anything to the Frogs,” said 
Service. “They just want to get us by surprise. They want to 
attack with their new steamrig.” 

“New steamrig?” 

“The Frogs,” said Service, “have a new steamrig which is 
half again as big as a conventional rig. It has more armor and 
firepower than thret. Javelins.” The sergeant gestured toward 
the steamrig ahead of them and Winchendon thought he saw 
an increase in activity on the machine, as well as he could tell 
through the telegraph lines in the foreground. 

“You’re talking through your hat. Sergeant,” said 
Winchendon. “They would never make a surprise attack. It 
goes against the code of steam warfare. And besides. I’ve 
studied a lot about steamrigs and 1 can tell you that nobody can 
build a drive train for a machine like you’re talking about.” 

Service shook his head. “Come on. Winch,” he said. “You 
sound like those old farts at Command.” 

“Don’t call me ‘Winch’,” said Winchendon. “Nobody can 
build the gears for a rig like that. A rig like the Javelin is as big 
as they can get. Any bigger and the minor imperfections in the 
gears set up vibrations that will shake the rig to pieces the 
minute it starts up. It’s impossible to machine the gears fine 
enough. Not to mention you couldn’t carry enough coal to fire 
such a big machine. There are enough problems with stoking 
the Javelin.” He remembered with a twinge the weeks he 
spent in the stoke hold of the great rig. 

“Maybe they have a new kind of fuel,” said Service. “And 
maybe they don’t use gears.” 

“Don’t make me laugh,” said Winchendon, rubbing his jaw, 
“it hurts. And I suppose you’re going to tell me we don’t have 
to guard the coastal highway because this giant rig will come 
overland from Montreal where the Frogs have their steam 
works. 1 suppose this big machine doesn’t need regular steam 
highways.” 

Winchendon noticed a definite increase in activity on the 
distant rig. Crewmen rang along catwalks, shot up ladders, and 
rappeled down the torso on grapnels. Their red and white 
striped jerseys merely looked pink at this distance. 

“What’s going on?” said Winchendon. 

Before Service could venture an answer, the machine’s 
whistle sounded, shortly but piercingly. It screamed into the 
sky over Gloucester three times and Winchendon had to cup his 
hands over his ears against the excruciating sound. 

Service pushed the corporal. “Combat alert. Winch!” he 
shouted into the young man’s ear. “Double-time!” 

The two of them broke into a run, heedless of hangovers, 
bumpy brick pavement, small children, and a crystal blue sky. 

Winchendon swung himself into the basket from which he 
operated ihe Javelin's right arm. He pulled the clutch lever to 
engage the mechanical system which operated the traction 
telltales and enabled him to coordinate his operations with 
those of the left arm. 

“Forty-five degree swing,” barked the speaking tube next to 
his right ear. 

“Forty-five degrees,” shouted Winchendon, setting the 
pointer at forty-five and cranking the knobbed wheel which 
would engage the limiting studs. He checked his instrument 
board at the mechanical pointer for the left arm. As soon as the 
pointer crossed into the red area marked “Forward Swing,” he 
pushed his throttle for backward swing. It took three swings to 
get the arms into perfect coordination. Winchendon had a 
counterpart at the left arm, a man named Fitzsimmons who 
occupied a basket thirty feet away, on the other side of 
Service’s six inch gun. Once the two armsmen achieved perfect 
synchronization, their arm swinging could increase the rig’s 




' ’walking” speed by as much as three miles per hour. A steam- 
rig is a powerful machine, but it had not improved on any of the 
dynamics of human walking. Any steam crewman can talk at 
length on the importance of a good arm swing to steamrig 



locomotion. 

An armsman, however, performs his job with practiced 
motions and is able to remove some of his concentration from 
the operation once the rig is fully underway. It is much the 
same as a bicycle racer, who is able to take his mind from the 
complicated work of pedaling and balancing in order to 
consider strategy. It was inevitable, then, that Winchendon’s 



33 



mind would begin to drift and to reconsider the events of what 
had been (so far) the most unpleasant day of his life. Not since 
he had fled his parents’ poverty-stricken farm near Smyrna. 
Delaware had he suffered such humiliation. Captain Feller had 
made him and Service stand within the railing of the Javelin 's 
broad “epaulet.” 

They stood in the wide-footed stance which passes for 
“attention” on board a swaying steam rig. They waited for 
Captain Feller to finish shouting into his speaking tube, The rigi 
was thunderous when it was underway, but the captain was a 
big man and took resonance from the full height of his body 




when he spoke. 

“Stay on the steam road,” shouted the captain into the tube. 
“We'll use 128 at least until we hit Peabody. Stand by for 
more orders when we get there.” 

He replaced the cap on the speaking tube and looked up at 
the two crewmen. 

“Corporal,” bellowed the captain, “you’re lucky- the Steam 
Corps outlawed flogging.” The captain, an old-timer, often 
forgot himself and referred to the service by its obsolete 
designation as a Corps. 

Winchendon gulped. He wanted to say something in his own 
defense, something to relieve the humiliation of being posted 
on the epaulet. But he couldn’t think properly with the wind 
whistling in his ears at twenty miles per hour. And he hadn’t 
the wherewithal for all the shouting anyway. 

“Do you like operating the right arm?” shouted the captain. 

“Yes, sir,” shouted Winchendon. 

“You don’t want to stoke again?” 

Winchendon thought about the grimy, sweaty cabin in which 
the stokers strained their backs firing the furnace for 
Javelin's four cylinder reciprocating engine. “No, sir,” he 
shouted. 

“I’m sure Chief Duff would be happy to get you back down 
there in the engine room,” the captain bellowed. 

Winchendon didn’t know what to say. 

“You’re going to have to get back to your arm,” boomed the 
captain. “We can’t make top speed without the swinging. 
You’re just lucky we don’t have another trained armsman.” 

“Yes, sir,” shouted Winchendon. 

He hoped the interview was over, but Service spoke up. 

“Sir,” said the gunny, with the practiced projection of a 
crewman, “are we going to fight?” 

“You’re damned right we are, Sergeant,” said the captain. 
“The goddam Frogs are here.” 

Service glanced quickly at Winchendon and smiled. 
Winchendon just wanted to get off the epaulet and back to his 
station, but Service seemed determined to prove his 
contentions in front of the corporal. 

“What about the peace talks?” he said. 

“The peace talks have gone to Hell,” replied the captain, 
turning to bring a chart down from the rack beside him. 
“Normandy wasn’t ever interested in peace. Damned Frogs 
just wanted to take us by surprise. Their rig didn’t even come 
by the coast road, for God’s sake. It came overland from 
Montreal. If the reports are correct, it has destroyed the steam 
works at Lowell. 

“You had better get to your posts, both of you. The report 
says this rig is 150 feet tall. We’ve got the fight of our lives 
coming up.” 

T ime passes quickly in a steamrig. The large and 
powerful machine requires constant attention to keep 
it running smoothly and on course. Course corrections 
are frequent, speed and power are constantly 
adjusted for gradients, and when a rig is on combat status the 
gun drills are incessant. 

Winchendon did not notice how quickly time was flying as he 
responded to orders from the speaker next to his ear, 
accelerating and decelerating the swing of the right arm, 
throwing his clutch in and out. He was lost in the rhythm of the 
rig’s swaying gait. He had no idea that the captain had 
commanded the unprecedented operation of entering the 
metropolitan area at Peabody, that they were striding 
southwestward through the towns of Boston’s north shore, 
scattering pedestrians, carriages, and bicycles. He had no 
porthole at his station and he wasn’t privy to the captain’s 
decisions. He knew enough about tactics, however, to realize 
that their only chance was to engage the Norman north of the 
Charles River. They might hope to hold the invader there until 
the Talos and the Washington got word and followed. 

Winchendon swung slightly in his gimbaled basket, working 



his throttles and clutch automatically, when a strange hum 
brought him back to where he was. His experienced ears picked 
up the unusual sound from among the crashing din which 
echoed about the work cabin. 

“What's the matter, there. Winch?” shouted Service from 
across the cabin. 

“I don’t know yet. Sergeant,” shouted Winchendon, too 
concerned with his board to notice Service’s use of the hated 
nickname. 

Service went back to berating his gun crew, putting them 
through their loading and servicing drills. 

The hum continued and Winchendon saw his steam pressure 
gauge advancing. He hadn’t heard any orders to pick up speed 
and he began to worry. He waited another second, then tried to 
throttle down during the forward swing, just to see if he could 
reduce the pressure. Fitzsimmons would notice it immediately 
and would compensate. The hum continued. Throttling down 
did nothing to push the needle back. 

“Sergeant,” he shouted to Service. “Trouble here.” 

“What is it. Winch?” shouted the Gunnery Sergeant. “Oh, 
God, boys. There it is. Have you ever seen anything like it?” 

Winchendon risked a glance at Service and his gun crew. The 
sergeant was jumping back and forth between the big gun’s 
sights and the side of the port, where he could see out. 

“I got trouble with that bearing. Sergeant,” bawled 
Winchendon, the hum increasing alarmingly. 

“Not now. Winch,” shouted Service. “We’ve sighted the 
Frog.” 

Winchendon heard a fearful groan and he knew the bearing 
was seizing up. 

Service looked up from talking with one of his gunners. 

“Winch,” he shouted, “throttle back that arm!” 

“That’s what I’m doing. Sergeant,” shouted Winchendon, 
getting scared. 

“Then get her into the forward position if you can,” shouted 
Service. “It sure won’t do us much good down. Ninety 
degrees.” 

Winchendon reset his pointer at ninety degrees and wound 
the knobbed wheel to adjust the steamrig’s enormous set 
screws. 

“Fitzsimmons,” bawled Service to the other side of the 
cabin, “stop your swing. We’ll be off balance.” 

Winchendon threw his forward throttle up in an effort to 
drive the arm upward. There was another groaning and a 
vibration which gripped his basket. 

“Goddam it, Winch,” shouted Service. “Power down on the 
other throttle. Do it now. I don’t want to have to come over 
there.” 

“Yes, Sergeant,” said Winchendon, knowing there was a 
ton of steel under the most awful stress not twelve inches away. 
He powered down on the reverse throttle and kept pushing the 
vibrating forward throttle. 

“What’s going on down there?” shouted the speaker next to 
his ear. 

“The bearing’s freezing,” croaked Winchendon, unable to 
stop his tears. 

Service was dancing about the big six-inch gun, checking 
sights, making adjustments, and cuffing his gunners. 

“Goddam you. Winch,” he shouted at the corporal in the 
midst of his ministrations to the gun. “You break this 
machine’s arm, and the Corps gonna dock your pay again.” 

“Yes, Sergeant,” said Winchendon, regaining control. He 
threw in the clutch, then took it out again. He could see from 
his pointers that the arm was moving forward by inches under 
his manipulations. The groaning changed to a grinding and he 
thought perhaps that that was a good sign. Then it occurred to 
him that Service might have been joking about his pay being 
docked, but he didn’t know for sure. He had never known 
Service to joke in such a friendly way. 

Service had his head stuck out of the side of the gun port 
again. He brought it back in. “It’s doing it,” he shouted. 



Winchendon could almost see the enormous arm outside 
shuddering and creaking and inching forward. 

“Okay, Winch,” shouted Service. “Power everything down, 
now.” 

Just then Winchendon could feel the rig come to a stop. The 
giant engine vibrated belowdecks, but the rig became 
immeasurably quieter as the clanking gears ground to a halt. 

“Move now,” said Service to his crew. “Captain will call for 
fire any minute.” 

Winchendon heard a dull thump and he knew the Javelin was 
being fired upon, that the Norman was knocking down 
buildings trying to range the American rig. He hated the 
Normans for involving innocent people in this battle. 

There was a sudden roar and the crew of the Javelin were 
pitched violently. Winchendon was grateful for his gimbaled 
basket, which kept him from striking any of the bulkheads in 
the cabin. He got his swinging basket stopped and looked 
around with the feeling that the cabin suddenly had better 
lighting. Then he looked upward and realized there was no 
longer any ceiling. It seemed like hours before he came to the 
inevitable conclusion that the Javelin had lost its head, and 
with it, its captain, pilot, and Stevens, the gunner. 

Service was bringing himself back to his feet, cursing. He 
looked up and took in the situation. 

“Prepare to fire,” he barked at the gun crew. But they were 
beyond hearing. One of them was nowhere to be seen, the 
other was wounded in the neck and looked to have another 
thirty seconds left in him. 

The sergeant took the wounded man as gently as possible 
from the seat at the gun, heedless of the blood which splashed 
over the front of him. He half carried and half dragged the man 
aside and took his seat. He struck the big gun’s firing button. 
The gun jumped back on its rails as the shell roared away. 

“Wide, goddammit,” he shouted. “Winch, you’re going to 
have to take over loading. Fitzsimmons, get over here.” 

Winchendon pulled himself out of his basket and walked 
unsteadily toward the gun. 

“Move, now. Winch,” shouted Service. “The bastard’s 
going to shoot again. Fitzsimmons, where are you?” 

Winchendon looked over toward the other armsman. Under 
the streaming daylight, he could see that Fitzsimmons was 
dead. Most of the front of the man was a wound. 

Service was muttering and making adjustments on the 
gun’s sights. “Give me another shell in the chamber, Winch,” 
he said. 

Winchendon heard another whistling roar overhead and 
guessed that another shell was passing over, where the 
Javelin 's head used to be. He jumped toward the shell rack and 
wrestled one of the big rounds onto the carrier. He pushed the 
carrier along its short track, with the red head of the round 
pointed toward the back of Service’s gun. He put the brake on 
the little carrier, opened the gun’s breech, and jacked the 
round into the chamber. He pushed the shell carrier back to the 
ammo rack. 

Service punched the firing button. The great gun boomed 
and slid back into the cabin on its rails. Winchendon thought to 
look out the gun port for the first time and saw the largest 
steam rig he had ever seen, or could ever imagine. Half again 
as high as the Javelin (judging by a water tower close by), it 
had guns on its epaulets as well as in the chest and on the head. 
He knew it probably carried enough marines to subdue Boston 
easily. There was a flash and explosion at the machine’s 
“shoulder,” however, and Winchendon noted that its 
armament had been reduced by Service’s marksmanship. 

“Get that hatch open. Winch,” said Service, nodding his 
head toward the hatch which led to the deck below. “You have 
to get down to Chief Duff and tell him to get underway.” 

Winchendon jumped over to the hatch, twisting the dogs 
open. 

“Once we’re underway,” said Service, “get back up here 
and post one of those marine dandies to relay orders.” 



Larry Blamire 



•^35 









36 



Winchendon threw the hatch open and climbed down the 
ladder into the next cabin. He climbed down as quickly as he 
dared and alighted among a platoon of marines. 

“What’s going on, Corporal?” said the blue-jacketed 
platoon leader. 

“1 have orders from Sergeant Service to the Chief Stoker,” 
said Winchendon. He ran to the next hatch, the one leading to 
the engine room. He began working to get it open. 

“When I come back,” he said, loosening the dogs of the 
other hatch, “post your men along here to take the Sergeant’s 
orders to the engine room.” He got the second hatch open 
and jumped to the ladder, noticing the puzzled expression on 
the marine’s face as he slid into the roaring darkness of the 
engine room. 

“Chief Duff.” he shouted at the stokers, who were shoveling 
dusty coal into the Javelin’s furnace. One of the stokers, a 
bare-chested, heavyset man, separated himself from the crew. 
He wiped a grimy face with the dirty kerchief tied around his 
neck. 

“Orders from Sergeant Service,” said Winchendon. 
“Captain and the pilot are gone. We’ve got to get underway 
immediately.” 

Chief Duff didn’t say anything, just turned and bent to his 
shoveling, with the other four stokers following suit. 
Winchendon scrambled back up the ladder and spoke to the 
marine who stood at the top. 

“Is he going to want a boarding party?” said the platoon 
leader, nervously glancing toward the porthole which outlined 
the enormous Norman rig with its amputated arm. 

“Your guess is as good as mine,” said Winchendon, 
bounding toward the second ladder. “Post some men to 
instruct the legsmen here.” He pointed to the ends of the 
cabin, then began climbing up the ladder. 

As he reemerged into the chest gun cabin. Service was 
reseating himself at the gun, having just completed another 
loading. The sergeant punched the firing button. The gun 
boomed and slid back on its rails. The Javelin suddenly jerked 
into motion and began to hulk forward. 

“Winch,” shouted Servcice, “tell them fifteen degrees left. 
Then full ahead. We’ve got to get to the River. We might be 
able to get supporting fire from the Revenue Cutters.” 

“Brake the left leg,” shouted Winchendon to the marine at 
the bottom of the ladder as he calculated the adjustments to 
implement Service’s orders. “Three swings.” 

He heard marines repeating the orders to each other. He 
looked back out the gun port. It seemed an eternity before the 
Javelin began to turn at all. 

“He isn’t much of a marksman,” said Service, getting up 
from the gun to wrestle another round onto the loading 
carriage. “And he probably won’t follow immediately. We 
don’t pose much of a threat and with a new rig like that, the 
captain will want a complete damage report before he takes up 
the chase.” 

The Javelin’s top speed was cut by five miles per hour or 
more, due to the absence of arm swing and a lot of other 
damage. Winchendon wondered how the machine must look. It 
walked, headless, through the streets of Somerville, one arm 
outstretched, the other down. Doubtless they were scattering 
horses, people, and dogs. 

He looked out the gun port, however, and noticed for the first 
time that the streets were deserted. A steamrig within the city 
limits was a novelty, but the artillery duel had obviously 
frightened away on-lookers. 

It took twenty minutes for the crippled Javelin to navigate 
the five miles to Charlestown and the riverside. Winchendon 
felt apologetic about the damage it was doing to local 
structures, but he knew there was nothing Service could do 
about it, even if he thought the sergeant cared enough to 
prevent it. The system of getting orders to the engine room and 
the two legsmen was so cumbersome as to make real 
maneuvering impossible. 





37 







38 



The riverside area, however, is a manufacturing district and, 
once there. Service was able to position the machine among 
the tall buildings, so that it was effectively hidden. He and 
Winchendon had a view which encompassed part of the river 
and part of Charlestown toward Cambridge. There were small 
boats, mostly Revenue Cutters, chugging up and down the 
river. Civilian boat traffic seemed to be thinning out rapidly. 

The Javelin's engine vibrated belowdecks as Chief Duff and 
his crew kept the furnace stoked for as much power as they 
could get at idle. 

“What are you going to do. Sergeant?” said Winchendon. 

“Knocking off that arm was a lucky shot,” said Service. 
“Arms are never as heavily armored as the rest of the rig. We 
can’t hope to do that kind of damage to it again if we keep firing 
from a distance. I don’t know what to do.” 

Their first indication of the Norman’s approach was the 
screaming of a horsedrawn fire engine which careened around 
the corner a block away and then proceeded northwest. The 
horses were at full gallop and Winchendon could see gobs of 
foam running from the mouth of one. No sooner had the fire 
engine disappeared than a “platoon” of the local militia came 
running down the street in the opposite direction. They needed 
organization badly and Winchendon shuddered to think what 
the crack marines in the Norman steam rig would do to them 
once they were trapped at the edge of the river. Then the 
Norman appeared on the horizon, looming over the 
foreground buildings like a hemiplegic monster. At 150 feet, it 
towered over the structures of Cambridge and Charlestown. It 
was not using its guns, but simply walked with metallic 
confidence, smashing structures and crushing the citizens who 
got in its way. It appeared to be walking southeast toward the 
harbor area. 

“It’s in range now. Winch,” said Service. “Get on the shell 
loader.” The gunnery sergeant bent to his levers and screws. 

Winchendon wrestled another round into place for firing. 

Service looked up. “It’s no good,” he said. “If we shoot now, 
we aren’t going to do it any damage, but we will alert it to our 
position.” 

Winchendon watched the enemy machine moving inexorably 
southward. 

“Tell the Chief to prepare for full speed,” said Service. 

Winchendon jumped over to the hatch and shouted at the 
marine who was grasping the ladder at its base. 

“Prepare for full ahead,” he shouted. 

He went back to look out the port. 

“Our best hope is if we can sneak up on it,” said Service. 
“But 1 don’t see how we can do it.” 

Just then they noticed a small explosion near the rig’s head 
and noticed it was taking fire from someplace else. Shells 
began bursting around the machine. The barrage was coming 
from the river, where the small Revenue Cutters were firing 
with their tiny six-pounders. The enormous rig stopped and 
began to range itself for return fire. 

“Now,” shouted Service. “Full ahead.” 

Winchendon jumped back to the hatch. 

“Full ahead!” he shouted. 

He heard the marines repeating the order belowdecks. In 
less than a minute the Javelin roared into motion. 

“Winch,” shouted Service, “we’ll connect in a few minutes. 
Let’s just hope he misses when he fires on us.” 

Winchendon got up and went back to the gun port. He looked 
out at the Norman machine almost half a mile off. It was still 
preoccupied with the Revenue Cutters. 

The Javelin rocked and swayed as the legsmen took it 
through its most rapid stumbing gait. 

“Give me a two degree left correction,” shouted Service. 

Winchendon ran to the hatch and shouted the orders to the 
waiting marines, who relayed them. 

The Javelin was closing the gap between itself and the 
Norman colossus. 

Back at the gun port, Winchendon saw the giant machine 



begin to turn toward them. 

“He sees us now,” shouted Winchendon. 

“He has time for one shot.” said Service, “before we ram 
him and disembowel him. Let’s hope he is true to form.” 

They saw the Norman’s chest gun cough smoke and a shell 
roared overhead to splash into the Charles River. 

“It’s a good thing that chest gunner is such a bad shot,” said 
Service, laughing. 

The Norman machine loomed before them and filled the 
entire gun port. Winchendon grabbed a cabin strut to brace 
himself, just as the Javelin ground suddenly to a stop, and 
everything was pitched forward. He knew his rig’s upraised 
arm was striking the Norman machine about fifteen feet below 
its chest gun port. It was the first time a steam rig had ever 
physically grappled with another. For an instant, he wondered 
if this maneuver would be known as “Service’s Stiff Arm.” 

He looked up through the opening where the Javelin’s head 
used to be and thought he noticed the Norman machine actually 
rocking under the impact. He could see panic-stricken 
expressions on the faces of the rig’s two pilots and he knew that 
they must mirror his own. 

Service was still at his post. “We won’t miss this time. 
Winch,” he said. The gunnery sergeant punched the firing 
button for his big gun again. There was a roar and everything 
went black. 

• • 

Winchendon came around slowly. It was quiet and bright and 
he wondered if he were dead. It hurt him to breathe, however, 
so he assumed he was somehow still alive. He opened his eyes 
carefully and saw Service, with a complicated bandage 
covering the top of his head, standing at the foot of his bed. 
Bed? 

“How do you feel. Winch?” said Service. 

“I hurt all over,” said Winchendon. 

“Doc says you have a couple of broken ribs, but that seems 
to be the worst of it.” 

“What happened to you?” said Winchendon, trying to 
gesture at Service’s bandage. 

“Grazed by shrapnel,” he said and shrugged. “It hurts a lot, 
but it wasn’t much damage. I got one of the nurses to make the 
bandage look real serious, though. I don’t want to go back to 
duty right away.” 

“What happened?” 

“I’ll be serious with you. Winch,” said Service. “When 1 
fired the six-inch gun at point blank range, I didn’t expect any 
of us to survive it. I thought it would damage us as much as the 
Norman. It didn’t, though. As near as I can make out, the shell 
passed right through the Norman’s armor. Armor’s not built to 
stand up to a cannon shot from point blank range. If we’d even 
had a little bit of distance, it would have had the muzzle 
velocity to bust things up more. That’s what would have taken 
us with it. This way, though, it just passed right through. And 
coming out the other side, it passed through the engine room. 
The Norman went up like fireworks, blown up by its own head 
of steam. 

“We took a lot of shrapnel. Only eleven of us got through, 
but none of the Normans made it. They were closer to their own 
boiler than we were. We were protected by our own rig and the 
front of theirs. The explosion went out the back.” 

“Who survived?” 

“You and I made it, and all the stokers. Most of the marines 
were killed, though. They were disembarking the Javelin and 
didn’t have the protection we had. I like to think they were 
getting out to form a boarding party.” 

“Yeah,” said Winchendon. 

“Well, I got to go now,” said Service. “There are some 
sailors off a revenue cutter down from Gloucester who say they 
want to buy me a drink.” 



THE NIGHT MACHINE 
[Continued from page 27] 

fool. If that’s what you want/ all right. You can stop now. Do 
you hear me? Please stop now,” she begged and he realized 
that like a turtle on its back, he was still trying to turn over and 
crawl to the doorway. 

He woke in a moving hover, to the sky racing past, and he 
woke again in Leo’s lab while the machines were copying his 
mind, making a record of his memory for the him that would 
be. After that, there was a long period of dreamless sleep. 
Then dreams came and with them, the night machine but it no 
longer clanked and rumbled, but hummed softly. He woke to 
find that he was in a hover once more. Dyane was piloting it 
and there were still tear tracks down her intricately patterned 
cheeks. 

He struggled weakly against the stretcher he was strapped to 
and she whispered, “It’s all right. It’s done. It’s almost over 
now.” He believed her and lay quietly. 



The party was twice as loud as it had been before. A dozen or 
more people came crowding up to Dyane when she got out of 
the hover, laughing and pulling at her. “Where have you been? 
Have you forgotten this is the day for your new skin? 
Everything is ready. We’ve got to go now." None of them 



He woke in a moving hover, to the sky 
racing past, and he woke again in Leo's 
lab while the machines were copying his 
mind, making a record of his memory for 
the him that would be. After that, there 
was a long period of dreamless sleep. 
Then dreams came and with them, the 
night machine but it no longer clanked 
and rumbled, but hummed softly. 



spared more than a glance for Alec on the stretcher, for which 
he was grateful. 

Dyane pulled away from them and looked down at herself. 
She pushed up her sleeves and stared at the patterns on her 
arms. The others stood back and looked at her too. She smiled 
at them. “I’m not ready to shed myself just yet,” she said. 

She ignored their protests and, picking out the two strongest, 
had them carry Alec’s stretcher to his room. When they had 
gotten him into the robo-nurse, she cleared the room. “Leo is 
coming by as soon as he is sure everything is all right. He said 
he would bring you what he promised. He said to wait for 
him.” She looked at his poor battered body doubtfully, “Can 
you wait for him?” 

“I can wait,” he whispered. But he couldn’t wait with his 
eyes open. The lids were too heavy and the pain was too great. 
He closed his eyes and let himself drift down into the warm 
softness of somewhere deep inside himself and as he was 
drifting he heard her voice close to his ear for himself alone. “I 
came with you this time, Alec. Remember that. I came with 
you.” 

He could not solve the riddle in her words but the warmth in 
her voice was what he needed to ease the pain and help him 
find peace, and he slept. 

There were long slivers of moonlight in the room when he 



woke again and for a moment they looked like gigantic teeth. 
When he shook himself free of the robo-nurse’s coils, shadows 
stirred in the darker recesses of the room. The shadow in the 
corner with the pale round face was Leo and the other shadow 
clothed in herself was Dyane. When they saw he was awake, 
they exchanged glances, and he saw that they had come to 
some mutual understanding. 

Dyane got up and left the room and Leo walked over to his 
side. “Nothing can stop us now,” he said. “You’re free.” But 
he was no longer the genial madman. Something had changed. 

“Dyane helped me?” 

“After she tried to stop you. She told me that. She told me 
why.” 

“Tell me.” 

“Because of this.” He handed Alec a small brown bottle. 
“Because she knew that after that came this and she was going 
to lose you again.” 

Alec took the bottle and held it tightly like some rare and 
precious jewel he was afraid might slip from his grasp. “You’re 
sure?” he asked Leo. “You’re positive that nothing can stop it 
now.” 

“I’m sure.” 

“Then 1 want to be by myself.” 

“Certainly,” Leo said, but he remained a standing by the 
bed. 

“There’s something else. 

“I didn’t know she was going to do it. And you won’t know 
until the computer tells you. I swear, Alec, I didn’t know what 
to do. She insisted. “ Of all the strange sights Alec had seen in 
his life, this was the strangest, tears streaming down Leo’s 
round face. “I had to let her do it. You understand that, don’t 
you. Alec. Only it makes everything different, don’t you see.” 

He gripped Leo’s wrist and was surprised to find that Leo 
could not pull away. “What did she insist on doing?” 

“She went with you. She had me take her cells as well, and 
she made the tapes. She’ll be with you in that ship. Only you 
won’t know until after the computer tells you because that was 
after your tapes were made.” The tears streamed down his 
face. One splashed on Alec’s hand and he jerked it away as 
though it had burned. “You’re different, Alec. You’ll never 
stop struggling. That’s why I knew you would be perfect for the 
probe. You’ll never give up until you know there is someone to 
take your place and even then . But she only went because 
she loves you.” Leo buried his face in his hands and Alec could 
hear his muffled words. “I’m not going to be able to sleep.” 
Then, because Leo too was strong in his own way, he pulled 
himself together and stood up. “You’re well out of it,” he said. 
“I’ll do what I can for her before I go.” 

He left and Alec was alone with the small brown bottle. It 
seemed to glow with a warmth of its own against his palm. That 
was it, then, everything settled and the future assured. The 
small brown bottle held the end of life and the end of pain. 
They were one and the same and all he had to do was drink. 

He unscrewed the lid with trembling fingers, thinking only of 
the tiny bit of self he had sent seeking other stars. The lid came 
free and dropped to the sheets. He stared into the open mouth 
of the bottle and thought of Leo unable to sleep. He thought of 
Dyane, at home at last in her own skin. He turned his wrist and 
let the liquid dribble out on the floor. The empty bottle slipped 
from his fingers. 

He would struggle on a little longer. He could do that. 



40 



JEM 

by Frederik Pohl 




Part 5 



F irst priority was to get everything movable 
inside the perimeter of the camp. That meant 
organizing working parties and armed guards to go 
with them. No Krinpit had been spotted near the 
landing site, but the woods were full of them. It wasn’t until the 
first detachments began straggling back with cases of food and 
boxes of microfiche, folded bicycles and crates of electronic 
parts, that Margie relaxed long enough to greet the new 
arrivals. She shook each hand, spoke each name, and turned 
them over to Santangelo for assignment to quarters. A short 
black major hung behind. “I’ve got something for you, 
colonel,’’ he said, patting a dispatch case. “In private, if you 
please, ma’am.’’ 

“Come ahead, Vandemeer, is it?” He nodded politely and 
followed her into her office, where he placed his dispatch case 
on her desk. 

“This is it, ma’am,” he said, unsnapping the case. 

It was not a dispatch case. When he had undone the snaps 
the side peeled back and revealed a microprocessor with a 
liquid-crystal panel. He touched one of the buttons and it 
sprang into light, displaying a row of close-typed symbols. 

“There’s your guidance, ma’am. There are twelve satellite 
busters in orbit, and these are the controls.” 

Margie touched it. A warm feeling grew in the pit of her 
stomach and spread, an almost sexual excitement. “You’re 
checked out on this, Vandemeer? Can you locate the Greasies’ 
satellites?” 

“Yes, ma’am. We’ve got acquisition and lock on four of 
theirs, including their main tactran receiver. Also the Peeps; 
they have two, but they don’t seem to be active.” He expertly 
punched a combination into the processor, and the colors of the 
symbols changed. “Green lights are ours. Red are Peeps. 
Yellow are Oilies. The lines that are still white are standby. If 
anything else comes within two million klicks the guidance 
system will track and identify it, and one of the spare birds will 
lock on.” 

“Thanks, major,” she said. “I want you to show me how to 
work this thing, and from then on I want it in your possession or 
mine, twelve hours a day each, until further notice.” 

“Yes. ma’am,” he said unemotionally. “And I have 
something your father asked me to hand to you personally.” 

It was a letter, not a microfiche. A paper letter, in an 
envelope with her name on it in Godfrey Menninger’s own 
handwriting. “Thanks, major,” she said again. “Go and get 
settled in, and take the controller with you.” As she turned, 
she added, “Major? Are things pretty bad at home?” 

He paused, looking at her. “Pretty bad,” he said. “Yes, 1 
would say that, colonel. They’re pretty bad.” 

Margie stood holding the letter for a moment. Then she 
jammed it in her pocket and went out to see how the loading 



was coming along, because she wasn’t quite ready to get the 
unc'ensored word on how bad “pretty bad” was. 

Putting it away did not let her forget it was there. While she 
was chewing Sergeant Sweggert out for talking up two of the 
new girls when he should have been shifting cargo, she was 
fingering it. When she was breaking up an argument over what 
had become of a case of flashlights — “Jesus, colonel, I just put 
them down for a second; I thought one of the other guys took 
them!” — her hand returned to it. When the mess tent called a 
halt for breakfast, she could resist no longer, and she took her 
tray and her letter back into her office and ate while she read. 







Marge, honey, 

You’ve got it all, everything on the list. But there’s no 
more where that came from. The Greasies have ordered our 
rigs off the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. It’s a bluff. We’re calling it. 
But every drop of booster fuel is now sequestered for 
missiles until they back down — and then there’s Peru. The 
Peeps have flanged up a phoney “election,” and we’re not 
going to sit still for it. So we’ll be at full military alert for 
months to come, maybe longer than that. 

You’re on your own, honey. Figure at least a year. And it 
may be more than that, because the President’s being 



threatened with impeachment, maybe worse — there was an 
assassination attempt with two National Guard tanks last 
week. I told him what to do. Declare martial law. Send 
Congress home. Crack down all around. But he’s a 
politician. He thinks he can ride it out. If he does, that 
means the rest of his term he’ll be trying to score brownie 
points with the voters, and that means cutting back a lot of 
important programs. 

And one of them might be you, honey. 

I wouldn’t be telling you this if I didn’t think you could 
handle it. But it looks as if you’ll have to. 



42 



That was all. not even a signature. Margie sat with the letter 
in her hands and minutes later noticed that she had forgotten to 
finish her breakfast. 

While Sergeant Sweggert was eating he heard two sounds, 
not very near and not very loud. They sounded like shots. No 
one else in the mess tent seemed to have heard anything. He 
scraped the plate of its canned ham and dehydrated eggs, 
picked up the big chunk of bread, and strolled toward the 
entrance, still chewing. 

There was a third shot. 

This time there was no mistake. Some dumb son of a bitch 
was playing with his piece. You couldn’t blame him — if 
Sweggert got a Krinpit in his sights he would have been 
tempted to blow it away, too. But three shots was wasting 
ammunition. He speeded up and headed toward the perimeter. 
As he rounded the cook tent he saw a dozen people standing 
around the uphill emplacement peering up the trail toward the 
spot where the resupply ship had landed. Others were 
converging on the post, and by the time he had reached it there 
were twenty, all talking at once. 

The shots had come from the trail. “Who’s out there?’’ he 
demanded, grabbing Corporal Kristianides by the shoulder. 

“Aggie and two grunts. They decided to get another load in 
before they bucked the chow line. Lieutenant Macklin just took 
a patrol up after them.” 

“So sit down and shut up till they get back,” Sweggert 
ordered: but it was an order he didn’t want to follow himself. It 
wasn’t like Aggie to shoot up the jungle. The crowd was 
getting bigger: Colonel Tree came trotting up, looking like a 
little China doll, then half a dozen from the mess tent, then the 
colonel herself. Ten people were all talking at once, until the 
colonel snarled, “All of you, at ease! Here comes Macklin. 
Let’s see what he has to say.” 

But Macklin didn’t have to say a word. He came stepping 
along the worn place that had become their path, carbine at 
port arms, looking both ways into the jungle. As he got closer 
they could see that the two men behind him were carrying 
someone, and the last soldier was backing toward them, 
carrying her weapon as Macklin carried his. 

What they were bringing in was a body. It was female, and 
that was all that you could say. The face was unrecognizable. 
When they dropped her down, it was plain that not only the 
face had been attacked. One arm was shredded up to the 
shoulder, and there was a bullet hole between her breasts. 

“Krinpit.” snapped Major Santangelo. 

“Krinpit don’t have guns,” said Colonel Menninger, 
tight-lipped. “Maybe Krinpit, but they had company. Tree! 
Check the perimeter. 1 want every weapon manned and a 
reserve at every point. Santangelo, fall the off-duty troops in. 
Give Sweggert and me two hundred meters, then follow us. 
Sweggert. take three people, and you and I are going to take 
the point.” 

“Yes’m.” He spun around, took Corporal Kristianides’s 
gas-operated recoilless away from her, and picked three from 
his squad at random while Colonel Menninger was listening to 
Lieutenant Macklin’s report. He had got only about halfway up 
the trail, where he found the casualty and a couple of spilled 
and ransacked cases of supplies. Where the other two were he 
didn’t know. He had come back for reinforcements. Marge 
Menninger listened to no more. She turned him over to Major 
Santangelo and signaled Sweggert to move in. 

At twenty-second intervals they dogged it across the open 
space that was the field of fire, reforming under the arch of a 
many-tree. As Sweggert waited for the others, he could hear 
the rattle and moan of some shelled creatures, but not very 
near. The next man heard it too and turned a questioning face 
to Sweggert. mouthing the word Krinpit. Sweggert nodded 
savagely and motioned silence. When Colonel Menninger 
crossed the field of fire, she trotted ten meters past them, then 
dropped to a knee and looked around warily before raising a 



hand and ordering them in. 

Fucking hairy, thought Sweggert. It was like that bitch to 
pick him for something like this! She’d had it in for him ever 
since he had it in her. He hand-signaled the rest of the patrol to 
move up one at a time, two on one side of the trail and the other 
with him and the colonel on the other, and when they had made 
their run he waited ten seconds and then sprinted to drop down 
beside the colonel. “That’s where they got her,” he breathed, 
pointing ahead on the trail, where half a case of fluorescent 
tubes lay crunched and scattered on the ground. 

“1 see that, sergeant! Keep moving, I don’t want Santangelo 
running up my ass.” 

“Yes’m.” He stooped low, dodging through the underbrush, 
and flopped down. The distant Krinpit rattle was still audible, 
but not closer. The patrol leapfrogged through the jungle until 
the bulk of the resupply ship loomed ahead, with its 
tramped-down clearing before it. He waved to catch Colonel 
Menninger’s eye, then pointed to the top of a many-tree. She 
nodded, and when his turn came again he raced for the nearest 
of its trunks, slung his GORR over his shoulder, started up the 
clump of growth. It was not much like climbing a real tree; it 
was easier. The flat, arched branches were like a series of 
steps, and the stalactitic growths that hung down between then 
made good handholds. The problem was that it was hard to see. 
Sweggert had to change position twice before he could get a 
clear view of the rocket. 

What he saw was the base of the ship, and right in front of it 
the bodies of the two other grunts. They had been savagely 
mutilated. There was no sign of Krinpit, and the sounds 
he had heard seemed to have gone farther away. 

Sergeant Sweggert began to feel a little better. Why the fuck 
should he worry about Krinpit? They were noisy bastards; 
there was no way one of them could get within twenty meters 
without him hearing it. And then the GORR would take care of 
it. Of course, he speculated, maybe they weren’t alone. Maybe 
there were a couple of Greasies with them. But what did that 
matter? Greasies were Greasies — they were spies, Ay-rabs, or 
limeys — and the day hadn’t come when he worried about 
meeting one of them in the woods. He pushed his cap back and 
settled down. If anything showed up in that clearing he would 
blow its ass off, and meanwhile he had entertaining 
spectacle of Margie Menninger silently worming her way 
forward on the ground, almost right under him. Off to the other 
side of the trail somebody else was moving, equally silently; he 
swivelled the GORR to sight in on it, but as the figure slid 
between bushes he saw that it was one of his own patrol. He 
returned the gun and slowly centered it on Marge Menninger, 
moving the cross hairs in the reticle down from the base of her 
skull to her hips. Wouldn’t it be nice, he speculated, if he could 
give her one she’d never forget, right up the old. 

The faintest of sounds behind him made him freeze. 

A little too late, he comprehended a mistake in his thinking. 
Krinpit and human beings were not the only creatures on Jem. 
As he started to turn he saw a skinny, stretched-out creature, 
longer than he was tall, climbing toward him with at least half a 
dozen legs, while others held what looked like some kind of 
gun. The damn thing was wearing sunglasses, he thought with 
surprise, trying to bring the GORR around. He was too slow. 
He never heard the shot that went through his head. 

• • 

Marge Menninger was the first one back into the camp. She 
didn’t wait for the cleanup; once they knew what they were 
looking for, the forty armed troops scoured the area. All they 
got was three of the borrowers, but one of them was the one 
who had killed Sergeant Sweggert. You were always a lucky 
son of a bitch, she thought; now you don’t have to worry about 
a court-martial for rape anymore. She collared a passing man 
and sent him running toward the communications tent, and 
before she was in her office she heard the announcement 
coming over the PA: “Major Vandemeer! Report to the colonel 



on the double!” 

She met him at the door. Good man, he was trotting over 
half-dressed, but he had the case with him. “Open it up,” she 
snarled. “They’re arming the Creepies against us, guns and 
glasses. That’s what Tinka was trying to get back to tell me. 
Move it, man!” 

“Yes’m.” But even the stolid Major Vandemeer fumbled as 
he undid the snaps. “Ready, ma’am,” he reported, fingers 
poised. 

The red fury in her mind was balanced by the warmth 
spreading at the base of her belly. She scratched vigorously 
and snapped, “Take ’em out!” 

“Who, ma’am?” 

“The Greasies! Bust their birds, all of them!” She watched 
the complicated ritual and then frowned. “While you’re at it, 
take the Peeps’ out too.” 

XIX 

ODFEY MENNINGER WOKE UP wondering who 
was shaking the foot of his bed. 

No one was. He was alone in his room, exactly like a 
hundred thousand Holiday Inn or Howard Johnson’s 
Motor Lodge rooms all over the world. There was the phone on 
a nightstand table beside the bed, the TV set staring grayly 
across at him from the long desk-plus-chest-plus-luggage-rack 
that stood against the wall. The phone was almost the only 
visible element that made it different, for it was a pushbutton 
jobber with colored lights flickering across its face. The other 
element of strangeness was harder to see. The drapes over one 
walls covered an immense likris display panel, not a window. 
There was no point in having a window. He was two hundred 
meters under the earth. 

It was 6:22 on the clock. 

Menninger had left orders to be awakened at seven. 
Therefore it was not a call that had awakened him. Therefore 
there were only a couple of other possibilities, and neither of 
them was attractive. God Menninger considered picking up the 
phone or switching on the TV or pulling back the drapes over 
the likris situation screen, any of which would have told him at 
once what was happening. He decided against doing so. If it 
had posed an immediate threat, he would have been notified at 
once. Margie’s disciplined and heirarchical approach to 
problem-solving had not been taught at West Point, it had 
come to her on her father’s knee. If she was good at putting 
unwanted thoughts out of her mind, he was superb. He 
dismissed the question^ slipped into his brocaded robe, went 
into the bathroom and made himself a cup of instant coffee with 
tap water. 

God Menninger’s waking-up minutes were precious to him. 
He was of the opinion that both his marriages had failed 
because he had been unable to make either wife understand 
that he was never, not ever, to be spoken to for at least half an 
hour after waking. That was coffee time, and summoning-up- 
strength time, and remembering-what-he-had-to-do time. 
Conversation destroyed it. A weakness in Godfrey Menninger’s 
character was that he was apt to destroy anyone who infringed 
on it. 

The coffee was at just the right temperature and he drank it 
like medicine, swallow by swallow, until it was down. 

Then he threw off the robe, sat cross-legged in the half-lotus 
position on the bed, let his body go calm and began to say his 
mantra. 

Godfrey Menninger had never really understood what 
happened among his neurons and synapses when he practiced 
transcendental meditation, nor had he ever really tried. It did 
not seem to do any harm of any kind, except to cost him 
twenty-four hundred seconds out of every twenty-four hours. 
He seldom discussed it with anyone else and therefore did not 
have to defend it. And it seemed to work. Work how? Do what? 
He could not exactly have said. When he did it, he felt more 



43 

confident and more relaxed about his confidence. That was not 
a bad return on the investment of less than three percent of his 
time. 

As he sat, his body withdrawing from him, the reiterated 
ta-lenn, ta-lenn of the mantra becoming a sort of drapery of 
sound that surrounded him without being present, his whole 
brain became a receptor. It contributed nothing. It only 
perceived. On the inside of his eyelids he saw faces and shapes 
that melted into each other. Some were beautiful and some 
gargoyles. Some were etched in the sharpest of drypoint lines. 
Some seemed to be beaten out of gold. They held no emotional 
content for him. The demon snarls did not frighten. The 
loveliness did not attract. They were only there. Wispy chains 
of words floated past his conciousness, like snatches of 
conversation from the next table at a restaurant. They spoke of 
ultimata and megatonnages and a remembered caress and the 
need for a haircut, but there were no imperatives in them 
anywhere. The circulating memory that pumped them past his 
mind sucked them away again without residue. 

More than two thousand kilometers away and half a 
kilometer down, inside a submarine belonging to the Fuel Bloc, 
a vice-admiral in the Libyan navv was programming The One 
That Had His Name on It. Menninger did not know it. His 
thoughts floated free into infinity in all directions, but all the 
directions lay within that inner space of his mind. He could not 
have done anything useful about it if he had. 

• • 

The bed moved again. 

It was not an earthquake. There were no earthquakes in 
West Virginia, he thought, bringing himself up out of reverie, 
getting ready to open his eyes. It was sharper than an 
earthquake would have been, more quick and trivial than the 
slow battering of a crustal slip. It was not particularly strong 
and if he had been still asleep, it might not even have 
awakened him. But it was something. And then the lights 
flickered. 

Two hundred meters down in the side of a West Virginia 
mountain the lights were not meant to flicker. A Pu 235 
megawatt generating plant, vented through a kilometer of 
piping to emerge on the other side of the hill, was immune to 
most external events. Lightning bolts did not strike 
transformers underground. Winds could not tear loose a line 
since there were no lines in the open air. And then, tardily, the 
flickering colors on the base of the telephone all went out. A 
single red light flared and the buzzer sounded. He picked up 
the phone and said, “Menninger.” 

“Three missiles came in, sir, near misses. There’s no 
structural damage. Point of origin backtracks probably to near 
Sinkiang Province. The city of Wheeling is out.” 

“I’ll be there in a minute,” he said. He was still coming up 
from his meditation and so he did not look at his own situation 
panel, but he also did not stop to shower or shave. He rubbed 
deodorant on his armpits, French whore’s bath but good 
enough, ran a brush over his hair, pulled on his coveralls and 
shoes and walked briskly down the placid, beige-carpeted 
corridor to his command room. 

The situation map was alight from end to end. 

“Here’s your coffee,” said General Weinenstat. That was all 
she said. She knew his ways. He took the cup without looking at 
her because his eyes were all on the board. It displayed a 
Mercator projection of the Earth in outline. Within it, bright 
red stars were targets taken out. Bright blue stars were also 
targets taken out, but on the wrong side: That was Washington 
and Leningrad and Buenos Aires and Hanoi and Chicago and 
San Francisco. Broken red profiles in the ocean areas of the 
map were enemy missile-launching vessels destroyed. There 
were more than a hundred of them. But there were also nearly 
sixty major concentrations not yet destroyed. There were 
relatively few of them. The number decreased as he watched. 
Kansas City, Tientsin, Cairo and the whole urban complex 




around Frankfort ceased to exist. 

The second cup of coffee was not medicine but comfort. He 
took a sip of it and then asked, “What’s their remaining 
second-strike capability?” 

"Marginal, Godfrey. Maybe one hundred missiles opera- 
tional within the next twenty-four hours, but we’re cutting that 
down all the time. We have almost eighty. And only two of our 
hardened installations are scratched.” 

“Local damage?” 

“Well — there are a lot of casualties. Otherwise not bad. 
Surface contamination is within acceptable limits, anyway 
inside shielded vehicles.” She signalled an orderly for a coffee 
refill and added, “Too early to tell about long-lived isotope 
capture, but most of the corn belt looks okay. So’s Mexico and 
the Pacific Northwest. We did lose the Imperial Valley.” 

“So we’re not bad for now.” 

“I would say so, yes, God.” 

“For the next twenty-four hours. Then they can start to 
redeploy.” She nodded. It was a known fact that every major 
country had squirreled away missiles and components. They 
were not at ten-minute command like the ones in the silos or on 
the subs. They could not be launched by pushing a button. But 
they could not be taken out at long range, either, since you 
didn’t know where they were hidden. He added, “And we can’t 
look for them, because the satellite-busters have half-blinded 
us.” 

“We’ve all-blinded them, Godfrey. They don’t have an eye 
in orbit.” 

“Yes, yes, 1 understand,” he said testily. “We’ve won the 
exchange. The damn fools. Well, let’s get to work.” 

Menninger’s ‘work’ was not directly related to the exchange 
of missiles that was remodeling the surface of the Earth closer 
to Hell. That was not his responsibility. It was only a 
precursor, like a friend’s retiring to the bathroom to fit in her 
diaphragm while he slouched waiting on the edge of the bed. 
She would not need his advice or his help at that stage and 
neither would the Chiefs of Staff while the actual fire-fight was 
going on. His involvement would be central immediately 
thereafter. 

Meanwhile, one of the damn fools had finished the 
programming and was trying to round up enough of a crew for 
the launch. It wasn’t easy. The neutron bomb had done just 
what ERW weapons were supposed to do, penetrated the 
carelessly scant meters of water and the steel tube of his 
submarine and knocked out most of the crew. The Libyan 
vice-admiral himself had taken nearly five thousand rads. He 
knew he had only hours to live but with any luck, his target 
would have less than that. 

• • 

Three hours’ sleep was not enough. Menninger knew that he 
was quick-tempered and a little fuzzy, but he had trained his 
people to know that too and they made allowances. At 
five-minute intervals the map disappeared and the likris screen 
sequenced itself through a round of ten-second displays; 
profiles of industrial capacity destroyed and remaining, curves 
of casualties, histograms of combat-effectiveness estimates. 

In the OpsRoom next to God Menninger’s command post, 
more than fifty persons were working on overdrive to correct 
and update those figures. Menninger hardly glanced at them. 
His concerns were political and organizational. Rose 
Weinenstat was on the scrambler to the Combined Chiefs every 
few minutes, not so much to give information or to get it as to 
keep them aware, every minute, that the most powerful 
unofficial figure in government had his eye on them all the 
time. His three chief civilian liaisons were in touch with state 
governments and government agencies, and Menninger 
himself spoke, one after another, with cabinet officers, key 
senators and a few governors — when they could be found. It 
was all U.S., not Fats; the rest of the Food Bloc was in touch 
through the filter of the Alliance room and when one of them 



demanded his personal attention, it was an intrusion. 

“He isn’t satisfied with me,” General Weinenstat reported. 
“Maybe you should give him a minute, Godfrey.” 

“Shit.” Menninger put down his pen at the exact place on a 
remobilization order where he stopped reading and nodded for 
her to switch over. 

The face on his phone-screen was Marshal Bressarion of the 
Red Army but the voice was his translator’s. “The Marshal,” 
said her voice, tinny through the scrambler, “does not question 
that you and the combined chiefs are acting under the 
President’s orders but he wishes to know just who the 
President is. We are aware that Washington is no more and 
that Strongbox One and Two have been penetrated.” 

“The present President,” said Menninger, patiently 
restraining his irritation, “is Henry Moncas, who was the 
Speaker of the House of Representatives. The succession is as 
provided in our basic law, the Constitution of the United 
States.” 

“Yes, of course,” said the translator after Bressarion had 
listened and then barked something in Russian, “but the 
Marshal has been unable to reach him for confirmation.” 

“There have been communications problems,” Menninger 
agreed. He looked past the phone, where Rose Weinenstat was 
shaping the words ‘in transit’ with her lips. “Also,” he added, 
“I am informed the President is in the process of moving to a 
fully secure location. As the Marshal will realize, that requires 
a communications lid.” 

The Marshal listened impatiently and then spoke for some 
seconds in rapid-fire Russian. The' translator sounded a good 
deal more uptight as she said, “We quite understand, but 
there is some question of lines of authority and the Marshal 
would appreciate hearing from him directly as soon — hello? 
hello?” 

His image faded. General Weinenstat said apologetically, “I 
thought it was a good time to develop transmission 
difficulties.” 

“Good thinking. Where is the son of a bitch, by the way?” 

“Henry? Oh, he’s safe and sound, Godfrey. He’s been 
ordering you to report to him for the last hour or so.” 

“Um.” Menninger thought for a moment. “Tell you what. 
Send out a radiation-safe team to escort him here so 1 can 
report. Don’t take no for an answer. Tell him he’ll be safer here 
than in his own hole.” He picked up the pencil, scratching the 
pit of his stomach. Which was complaining. He wanted orange 
juice to build up his blood sugar, a stack of flapjacks to give a 
foundation for the next cup of coffee, and that cup of coffee. He 
wanted his breakfast and he was aware that he was cranky 
because he was hungry. “Then we’ll see who’s president,” he 
added to the air. 

On the edge of the Bahia de Campeche the Libyan admiral 
had got his crew together and his submarine up to two hundred 
meters, running straight and level. None of them were 
functioning well, with prodromal diarrhea and vomiting often 
enough so that the whole ship smelled like a latrine, but they 
could serve. For a while, at least. They did. Libya’s naval 
doctrine called for one big missile instead of a few dozen little 
ones. As the big one broke the surface of the Gulf, it was 
immediately captured by a dozen radars. The scared but as yet 
untouched tourists on their lanais in Merida saw bright, bad 
flashes out west, over the water, as a Cuban cruiser locked in 
and fired ABMs. None of them caught it. It was a cruise 
missile, not ballistic, easy to identify but hard to predict as it 
drove itself north -northwest toward the Florida panhandle. A 
dozen times defensive weapons clawed at it as it crossed the 
coast, and then it was lost to view. There were plenty of 
installations along the way charged with the duty of detecting 
and destroying it, but none that were functioning any more. 

• • 

The latest picture from Margie showed her with one foot on 
the shell of a dead Krinpit, looking tired and flushed and 



happy. It was as good a picture of his daughter as God had had 
since her bearskin-rug days, and he had it blown into a hard 
print for his wallet. General Weinenstat looked at it carefully 
and passed it back to him. “She’s a credit to you, God,” she 
said. 

He looked at it for a moment and put it away. “Yeah. I hope 
she got her stuff. Can you imagine her mother? 1 told her 
Margie wanted some dress patterns, and she wanted me to put 
in about a thousand meters of fabric.” 

“Well, if you’d left her raising to her mother — wait a 
minute.” General Weinenstat touched the thing that looked 
like, but wasn’t, a hearing-aid in her ear. Her expression 
turned somber. 

“What is it?” 

She turned off the communicator. “Henry Moncas. His 
shelter took a direct hit. They’re trying to find out who’s 
President now.” 

“Shit!” Godfrey Menninger stared at the remains of his tray 
of breakfast for a moment and saw none of it. “Oh, shit,” he 
said again. “It looks bad, Rosie. The worst part is we never had 
a choice!” 

General Weinenstat started to speak, then changed her 
mind. “What? What were you going to say, Rosie?” 

She shrugged. “No good second-guessing, is it?” 

He pounced on her words. “About what? Come on, Rosie!” 
“Well — maybe moving into Canada — ” 

“Yeah, That was a mistake, all right. I’ll give you that. But 
not ours! The Greasies knew we couldn’t let them move troops 
into Manitoba. That was Tam Gulsmit’s mistake! Same with 
the Peeps. Once we were engaged we had to take Lop Nor 
out — quick, clean, minimum casualties. They should’ve 
accepted it instead of retaliating — ” 

But he could hear voices within him denying it, speaking in 
the tones of Tam Gulsmit and Heir-of-Mao. “We were safe 
moving troops in to protect the tar sands because we knew you 
couldn’t afford to invade.” “You shouldn’t have bombed Lop 
Nor. You should have known we would have to retaliate.” The 
voices within God Menninger’s mind were the only voices they 
would ever have again. Heir-of-Mao lay with his eyes bulging 
and tongue protruding from his lips, dead in the deep shelter 
under Peking, and the atoms that had once been Gulsmit’s 
body were falling out from the column of fire over Clydeside. 

The Libyan missile had by-passed Atlanta and Asheville and 
Johnson City, matching their terrains against the profiles 
imprinted in its memory. The safety interlocks on its 
thermonuclear charge were falling away one by one as its tiny, 
paranoid brain began to recognize the nearness to the thing it 
was unleashed to destroy. 

“It’s bad, Rosie,” said Godfrey Menninger at last, rising to 
return to his desk. Maybe he should have let Margie’s mother 
have the raising of her. Then Margie would probably have a 
husband and a couple of kids by now. And perhaps — perhaps 
the World would have been a different place. He wondered if he 
would ever hear from her again. “Rosie,” he said, “check 
Houston. See if the communication links with Jem are holding 
up. With the other colonies, too, of course.” 

“Right now, godfrey? Give me ten minutes; I’ve got a call 
coming in from the DoD.” 

“Ten minutes is fine,” he said; but before the ten minutes 
were up he was dead. 

XX 



T he coracle first appeared between showers, 

far out over the water. In the pit beside Ana 
Dimitrova, Corporal Kristianides — no. Lieutenant 
Kristianides now, she corrected herself — stood up 
and turned the field glasses on it. “Krinpit,” she said. “Son of 
a bitch. Lay your gun on it. Nan, but don’t fire unless I tell you 
to.” 



Unnecessary order! Not for worlds would she have fired. Not 
until she saw for herself that there was only Krinpit in the boat, 
and not Ahmed Dulla. Perhaps not even then, for this insanity 
of guns and shooting was awful even to play at. She had not yet 
had to fire at a living being and was far from sure that she 
could; she had said as much, but no one wanted to hear. The 
good thing about her machine-gun was that it had a telescopic 
sight and she was glad enough to aim it. 

The coracle disappeared into a squall but not before she had 
seen that there was no human being in it, though it was large 
enough for several. 

When it appeared again, it was larger and nearer and she 
could see that the single Krinpit was working furiously to keep 
it bailed and the trapeziodal sail intact, and paddling to bring it 
straight in to the camp. By then everyone had seen it and at 
least a dozen weapons were pointed at it. Over the P.A. system 
Guy Tree’s voice shrilled an order to hold fire. Down on the 
beach Marge Menninger stood, a GORR under her arm, 
oblivious of the rain that soaked her. Ana wiped the wet off her 
sight, as carefully as she had been taught, and looked again. 
She had no skill at recognizing individual Krinpit by sight, but 
this one did not look familiar. 

A disappointment of a hope. But what a foolish hope, she 
scolded herself. How improbable that Ahmed would once again 
miraculously appear. And even if he had, who was this Ahmed 
who had taken her, and used her, and left her again? He was 
not the person of Sofia, she thought gloomily, and roused 
herself and tried to think more constructively. 

It was a failure. There was so little to think constructively 
about! The world she had left was blowing itself up and the 
world she had come to seemed determined to do the same. 
What went on in the secret conferences among Marge 
Menninger and her warrior knights in the headquarters shed 
she did not know, nor wished to. But it might well be the death 
of all of them. 

The Krinpit was in the shallows now. It raised itself and 
splashed over the side and the coracle bobbed away as it 
lurched ashore. It seemed to be in bad shape. It staggered in a 
half circle on the shore and then fell to the ground with a 
painful crash as Colonel Menninger and half a dozen of her 
warriors formed a wary perimeter around it. 

Perhaps they would kill it, she thought. Well, let them. 
Everyone else was standing and staring but Ana’s attention 
wandered until one of the riflemen came running toward her. 
“Dimitrova, front and center!” he was calling. “It’s the one 
that speaks Pak! Colonel wants you to come translate!” 



• • 

When Ana Dimitrova was nineteen years old, precocious 
senior at the University of Sofia, candidate for the callosectomy 
that would forever sunder the two halves of her brain and lead 
to a distinguished career in translation, she had watched a film 
on the subject. It was not her choice. They would not accept her 
application without it. The first part was quite tedious, though 
instructive, as it described the anatomy of that senseless and 
defenseless kilogram of pinky-gray jelly that mediated and 
transformed and commanded all the senses and defenses of the 
body. Before her very eyes a surgeon took a human brain in his 
hands and peeled away tissue to expose that great suety bridge 
that connected the two halves and that, in her, she would ask 
someone to sever. There was a long explanation, quite hard to 
follow, of how nerves crossed so that the right half of the brain 
seemed to take responsibility for the left half of the body and 
vice versa: strange quirk of anatomy! She saw how the nerves 
carrying visual impressions intersected at the optic chiasma — 
but not completely, as though prankish evolution had tired of 
the joke and decided not to finish it. All that part of the film was 
quite hard to follow, as well as unsettling to look at. But then 
there were some comic parts. Each half of the brain 
commanded its own network of afferent and efferent nerves. 



46 

The efferent nerves, the ones that directed action, were spared 
in the resection, or reconnected afterward, which was why the 
split -brain people were able to walk without stumbling. Most of 
the time. The afferent nerves, the ones that accepted sensory 
impressions from the world, were kept apart. So each half of 
the brain could recieve and process and store its own 
information, not shared with the other: That was why 
translation came easy. 

But. 

But some kinds of afferent input were not value-free. They 
produced glandular responsjps. They caused emotions. This 
was where the comic part came in. The film showed a woman, 
one of the earliest volunteers for the surgery. She had an 
earplug in one ear and was reading from a prepared text. The 
voice-over narration described what she was doing: delivering 
a translated talk to a mathematical congress. But while one 
half of her brain was reading and translating and speaking, the 
other half was listening to the words coming in over the 
earplug: and those words were the filthiest of scatological 
jokes. The woman began to stammer and falter, and over her 
face spread the rosiest of blushes, though the operating half of 
her brain had not an idea in the world of why. Blushes. 
Stammers. Headaches. Depression. They were the symptoms 
of leakage from one half to the other. The scar tissue that 
blocked the flow of impulses through the corpus callosum let 
each half of the brain work efficiently on its own. But feelings 
seeped through. All the time Ana Dimitrova was translating for 
Colonel Menninger, she could feel them pounding at her — 
"He says that, as the People’s Republics are no longer a 
force, he wishes to help us against the Fuel Bloc.” 

“Fucking great. What’s he going to do, scratch them to 
death with his sharp little feet?” 

— and the headache was the worst she had ever had, sickening, 
sandbag blows at the base of her skull. She felt nauseated and 
was not helped by the Krinpit. Sharn-igon was repulsively ill. 
Even the dull, recurrent rasp of his name — Sharn-igon, 
Sharn-igon — was badly played, like a defective radio. His 
carapace was a sickly yellow instead of the rich mahogany it 
had been. It was cracked and seamed. At the edges of it, where 
undershell joined the massive armor of the top, seams did not 
quite join and a thin, foul liquid oozed out. 

“He has moulted,” she explained to the colonel, “and feels 
he is about to moult again. Perhaps it is because of the 
chemicals the Fuel people used against them.” 

“You don’t look so fucking great yourself, Dimitrova.” 

“I am quite capable of continuing. Colonel Menninger.” 

All the same, she moved away from the Krinpit. The 
exudations of his shell had darkened the sand around him and 
the smell was like rancid fat. Moving did not help. The 
headache, and the pain behind it grew with every moment. 

Marge Menninger ran her hands through her wet hair, 
pulling it back so that her ears were exposed. She looked 
almost like a little girl as she said, “What do you think, Guy? 
Have we got ourselves a real blood-hungry tiger?” 

Colonel Tree said, “One does not refuse an ally. Marge. But 
the Greasies would eat these jokers up.” 

“So what is he saying exactly, Dimitrova? That he’ll tell all 
his crawly friends to attack the Greasy camp if we want them 
to?” 

“Something like that, yes. What he says,” she added, “is 
not always easy to understand. Colonel Menninger, He speaks 
a little Urdu, but not much, and he speaks it very badly. 
Besides, his mind wanders. It is a personal matter, with him, to 
kill. He does not care who. Sometimes he says he wants to kill 
me.” 

Menninger looked appraisingly at the Krinpit. “I don’t think 
he’s in shape to do much killing.” 

“Must one be well for that?” Ana flared. “1 am sick in my 
heart from talk of killing, and from killing itself! It is a wicked 
insanity to kill when so few persons are still alive.” 

“As to that,” said Margie mildly, raising her hand to stop 



Guy Tree from exploding, “we’ll talk another time. You look 
like shit, Dimitrova. Go get some sleep.” 

“Thank you. Colonel Menninger,” Ana said stiffly, hating 
her, perhaps hating even more the look of compassion in 
Margie’s eyes. How dare the bloody trollop feel pity! 

Ana sta!ked off to her tent. It was raining hard again and 
lightning lashed over the water. She hardly felt it. At every step 
the throbbing in her head punished her, and she knew that 
behind the headache a greater pain was scratching to come out. 
Pity was the solvent that would melt the dam and let it through, 
and she wanted to be by herself when that happened. She 
stooped into the tent without a word to the woman who shared 
it with her, removed only her shoes and slacks and buried 
herself under the covers. 

Almost at once she began to weep. 

Ana made no sound, did not shake, did not thrash about. It 
was only the ragged unevenness of her breathing that made the 
black girl in the other cot rise up on one elbow to look toward 
her; but Ana did not speak, and after a moment her roommate 
went back to sleep. Ana did not. Not for an hour and more. She 
wept silently for a long time, helpless to contain the pain any 
longer. Hopes gone, pleasures denied, dreams melted away. 
She had held off accepting the thing that the Krinpit had said 
almost in his first sentence, and now it could not be denied any 
longer. There was no longer a reason for her to be on Jem. 
There was hardly even a reason to live. Ahmed was dead. 



She woke to the incongruous sound of dance music. 

The storm of the silent weeping had cleared her mind, and 
the deep and dreamless sleep that followed had begun the 
healing. Ana was quite composed as she bathed sparingly in 
the shower at the end of the tent line, brushed her hair dry and 
dressed. The music was, of course, that other of Marge 
Menninger’s eccentricities, the Saturday night dance. How 
very strange she was! But her strangeness was not all 
unwelcome. One of the fruits of it had been the 
patterns and fabric that had come in the last ship, and so Ana 
chose to put on a simple blouse and skirt, not elaborate but not 
purely utilitarian either. She was a very long way from dancing. 
But she would not spoil the pleasure of those who enjoyed it. 

She cut past the generator, where the Krinpit was rumbling 
hollowly as it scratched through the clumps of burnable 
vegetation for something to eat, a guard with a GORR trailing 
its every step, and visited the fringe of the dance area long 
enough to get something to eat from the buffet. (Of course, she 
had slept through two meals.) When men asked her to dance, 
she smiled and thanked them as she shook her head. The rain 
had stopped and sullen Kung glowed redly overhead. She took 
a plate of cheese and biscuits and slipped away. Not that there 
was far to go. No one walked in the woods any more these days. 
They lived and ate and slept in a space one could run across in 
three minutes. But all who could be there were at the dance, 
and down by the beach were only the perimeter guards. She sat 
down with her back against one of the machine-gun turrets and 
finished her meal. Then she put her plate down beside her, 
pulled her knees up to her chin and sat staring at the purple-red 
waves. 

Ahmed was dead. 

It was not much comfort to tell herself that her dreams had 
been foolish to begin with, that Ahmed had never taken her as 
seriously as she had taken him. Nevertheless, it was true, and 
Ana Dimitrova was a practical person. She had learned the trick 
of dissecting pain into its parts. That she would never see him 
again, touch his strong and supple body, lie beside him while 
he slept — that was purest pain, and there was no help for it. 
But that she would never marry him and bear his children and 
grow old by his side — that was only a spoiled fantasy. It had 
never been real. That loss could not hurt her now because it 
was of something she had never owned; and so her pain was 
diminished by half. 



(But. oh, how that half still ached!) 

She wept gently and openly for a moment and then sighed 
and rubbed the tears away. What she had lost, she told herself, 
she had lost long ago from the moment Ahmed came to Jem he 
had become a different person. 

In any event, it was over. She had a life to make for herself, 
and the materials to make it from were all in this camp, there 
was nothing else anywhere. You should dance, she scolded 
herself. You should go up where they are laughing and singing 
and drinking. 

Plainly and simply, she did not want to. It was not merely 
that she didn’t want to dance, not yet. It was deeper and more 
damaging than that. Ana, translating for the Krinpit, had 
heard enough of what was going on in the minds of Marge 
Menninger and Nguyen Tree and the other hawks who directed 
the fate of the camp. So much madness in so few minds! They 
were determined to carry on a war, even here, even after Earth 
itself had already blown itself into misery! And yet here they all 
were, smiling and bobbing around the floor. Her own brain had 
been divided by a surgeon’s knife. What had divided theirs so 
that they could plot genocide in an afternoon and drink and 
cavort and play their sexual games at night? How Ahmed 
would scowl at them! 

But Ahmed was dead. 

She took a deep breath and decided not to cry again. 

She stood up and stretched her cramped limbs. The Krinpit 
was lurching slowly down toward the water for a drink after its 
unappetizing, meal, the soldier wandering after. She did not 
particularly want to be near it but she needed to rinse her plate, 
either that or carry it back to the cook tent, which was too near 
the dance floor. She kept her distance, paralleling its scuttling 
path, and then she heard someone call her name. 

It was the Russian pilot, Kappelyushnikov, sitting 
cross-legged at a gun-pit and talking to Danny Dalehouse, on 
duty inside it. Why not? Ana changed course to approach them 
and wished them a good evening. 

“Is it truly good, Anyushka? But Danny Dalehouse has told 
me of the death of Ahmed Dulla. I am deeply sympathetic for 
you.’’ 

There it was, the first time someone had spoken of it to her. 
She discovered it was not impossible for her to respond. 
“Thank you, Visha,” she said steadily. “What, have you 
become a monk that you do not dance tonight?’’ 

“Is no one I care to dance with,” he said gloomily. “Also 
have been having most interesting discussion with Danny on 
the subject of slavery.” 

“And what have you concluded, then, Danny?” she asked 
brightly. “Are we all slaves to your mistress, the beautiful 
blond colonel?” 

He did not answer directly but chose to be placating. “I know 
you’re upset. Ana. I'm sorry, too.” 

“Upset?” She nodded judiciously, looking down into the pit 
at him. “Yes, perhaps. 1 must assume that my home has been 
destroyed — yours, too, I suppose. But you are braver than 1. I 
am not brave; I become upset. It upsets me that what has 
happened on Earth is now to happen again, here. It upsets me 
that my — that my friend is dead. It upsets me that the colonel 
intends to kill a great many more persons. Can you imagine? 
She proposes to tunnel under the Fuel camp and explode a 
nuclear bomb, and that upsets me.” 

Why are you doing this, she asked herself; but she knew she 
could not accept more sympathy without crying and she was not 
ready to cry before these men. At least she had diverted them. 
Dalehouse was frowning. 

“We don’t have any nuclear weapons,” he objected. 

“Soft-headed person!” she scoffed. “Your mistress has 
what she wants to have. I should not be astonished if she had a 
fleet of submarines or a division of tanks. She wears weapons 
as she wears that cheap perfume, the smell of them is always 
around her.” 

“No,” he said doggedly, peering up at her, “you’re wrong 



about the nuclear weapons. She couldn’t conceal that from us. 
And she’s not my mistress.” 

“Do not flatter yourself that 1 care. She may have her sexual 
excesses with whomever she likes, and so may you.” 
Kappelyushnikov coughed. “1 think,” he said, “dance has 
suddenly become more attractive.” 

As he stood up. Ana put her hand on his arm. “1 am driving 
you away. Please forgive me.” 

“No, no, Anyushka. Are difficult times for all, nothing to 
forgive.” he patted her hand, then grinned and kissed it. “As 
to myself,” he said, “I see beautiful blonde colonel roaming 
about alone and perhaps she wishes to dance or otherwise 
relate to some new person, such as 1. Also do not care for cheap 
perfume worn by big cockroach. You do not yourself desire to 
dance? Or otherwise relate? No. Then stay with friend Danny.” 
They watched him walk steadily toward Marge Menninger, 
strolling past her checkpoints. They heard her laugh as Cappy 
spoke to her; then he shrugged and moved on toward the dance 
floor. 

The Krinpit, in its random stagger around the beach, was 
coming closer. It was true that the stench of his exudations was 
strong. So was the sighing, droning sound of his presence. Ana 
listened, then said gloomily, “This one is muttering about his 
love now. It was killed somehow, 1 cannot tell how. 1 think 
Ahmed had something to do with it and it is for that that it is 
determined to kill human beings. But it had become Ahmed’s 
ally! Dan, is not that lunacy? It is as though killing has become 
an end in itself. It no longer matters who is killed or for what 
possible gain the killing is done. Only the killing itself 
matters.” 

Dalehouse stood up in his shallow rifle pit, looking up the hill 
toward the dancers. “She’s coming this way,” he said. 
“Listen, before she gets here. About her being my mistress — ” 
“Please, Danny. 1 spoke without thinking and because 1 am, 
yes, upset. It is not a time to worry about personal matters.” 
Clearly he was not satisfied and would have pursued the 
subject, but Margie was now too close. She paused to light a 
cigarette, studying the Krinpit and its guard, now a model of 
military deportment, his recoilless at port-arms, as the colonel 
approached. Then she came smiling over to Danny and Nan 
“Getting it on, are you?” she asked amiably. “When was the 
last time you checked your earphones, Danny?” 

Guiltily, Dalehous clapped the phone to one ear. He had 
been neglecting the buried microphone probes, which were 
supposed to warn of borrowers digging toward him under the 
ground. There was no sound. “Sorry. Margie,” he said. 

She shook her head. “When you’re on duty, that’s ‘colonel.’ 
And when I say ‘frog,’ you hop. Now that that’s understood,” 
she said, smiling sunnily, “would either of you folks like a hit 
before we talk some business?” 

“I am not in the habit of using narcotics,” Ana said. 

“Pity. Danny?” She watched while Dalehouse filled his 
lungs and, as she took the stick back from him, she said, “1 
want you to draft your gasbag friend. One hundred and — ” she 
glanced at her wristwatch — “one hundred and eight hours 
from now, give or take a little, we’re going to hit the Greasy 
camp, and he’s going to be our air arm.” 

Dalehouse coughed and spluttered. “He — he can’t — ” 
“Take your time, Danny,” she encouraged. “While you’re 
getting your breath, just listen for a moment. Storm’s over. 
Looks like we’ve got maybe five or six good days. I'm taking 
fifteen front-line effectives, plus you, Danny. We’ll mop up 
that camp without breathing hard. Only I don’t want to take a 
plane, and I don’t want you or Cappy floating around up there 
where they can see you, and that leaves Charlie.” 

“Charlie can’t fight!” ■ 

“Well,” she said reasonably, “come to that, 1 don’t figure 
you for your real Geronimo trained killer either. But 1 don’t 
expect it of you. You communicate. Charlie observes. The 
Greasies won’t pay any attention to one more fartbag hanging 
around — ” 



48 



“Bullshit they won’t! They’ve been shooting balloonists 
down all along.’’ 

“Danny,” she said, “I’m not asking your advice. I’m giving 
you an order.” She dragged on the joint, down to the last 
centimeter, and then carefully rubbed it out and pocketed it 
before exhaling. “You see,” she said, “the Greasies are going 
to come to the same conclusions 1 did, only it’ll take them a 
little longer. One of us has to run things. TTie only way to do 
that is to knock the other out. All Charlie has to do is hang in 
there with his radio and keep us posted if they send up a plane 
or put some people out in the woods. I’ll bring the company up 
over land. But we’re naked without air cover. We need to know 
when to get out of sight. That’s easy enough for him, right?” 

“Well, sure. But — shit, Margie. He’s almost the last 
survivor. It’s a lot to ask — ” 

“But I’m not asking, Danny, you keep making that same 
mistake. I’m ordering. If he doesn’t, he’ll make a nice flame.” 
She scratched under her belt, regarding him amiably. “So after 
the dance 1 break the news to camp, and tomorrow this time 
we’re on our way.” 

“To atom-bomb the Fuel Bloc,” said Ana bitterly. 

Marge Menninger’s face froze. After a moment she said, “1 
guess I’ll let that pass, Dimitrova. I didn’t specifically order 
you to keep your mouth shut. But 1 won’t let it pass again. 
What you hear when you’re translating is classified. " 

“Holy Christ,” Dalehouse said. “You really have a nuclear 
bomb?” 

“Bet your ass, Danny. You’ve got a piece of it right there in 
your ground mikes.” 

“Where? You mean the plutonium power-packs? That’s no 
good, Margie — Colonel, I mean. There’s not enough of them. 
Even if there were, you couldn’t flange them together to make 
a bomb.” 

“Wrong and wrong, Danny. Takes eighteen hundred grams 
and a bit to fission. 1 have a little over six thousand grams, all 
tidied away in the stores marked ‘fuel replacements.’ All this 
was planned a long time ago, and they’ll fit together because 
some pretty high-powered weapons people designed them to 
do that before the first ship took off. Oh, it’s not one of your 
hundred-megaton jobs. Maybe not even a kiloton because I 
don’t have containment to keep the parts together very long. 
But 1 don’t want a big one. 1 don’t want to wipe out the Greasy 
camp, I want to own it. I want to take out their ammunition and 
their food stores, and I know just the place to put baby for that. 
Then they can beg.” 

She looked serene and innocent as she said it, and Dalehouse 
responded with shocked disbelief. “That’s — that’s unprovoked 
aggression! A stab in the back!” 

“Wrong, Dalehouse. That’s preemption. The Greasies don’t 
have a choice, either. They just haven’t figured it out yet.” 

“Bullshit! It’s what the Japanese did at Pearl Harbor all over 
again!” 

She opened her eyes wide. “Sure, why not? There was 
nothing wrong with Pearl Harbor, except they fucked it up. If 
they’d gone on to take out the carrier fleet and followed up with 
a landing, history would be a lot different. You’d be saying 
‘Pearl Harbor’ the way you say ‘Normandy’ now, only you’d be 
saying it in Japanese.” 

She seemed quite pleased with herself, but then she 
hesitated. She sought a dry place on the ground and sat down 
before adding, “But I will admit to you two dear old friends 
from Bulgaria that right now I’m scared, and tired, and not 
what you’d call real happy with the way things are going. 
I’m — what’s the matter with that thing?” 

The Krinpit was staggering closer to them, moaning and 
stridulating. Ana listened. “He is quite hard to follow. He is 
speaking of Poison Ghosts and Ghosts Above — that is, of 
ourselves and of balloonists. He seems to have us confused in 
his mind.” 

“All enemies look alike after a while, I guess. Tell him to 
back away. I don’t like the way he smells.” 



“Yes, Colonel Menninger.” but before Ana could summon 
up the commands in Krinpit-Urdu, Margie stopped her again. 

“Wait a minute. What was that?” There had been a voice on 
the P.A. system, along with the blare of dance music. 

“I couldn’t make it out,” said Dalehouse, “but I do hear 
something. Out in the woods. Or in the air — ” 

Then the dance music abruptly died and a scared voice 
replaced it. “Colonel Menninger! All personnel! Aircraft 
approaching!” 

The sounds were clear now, two sets of them; the whickering 
putt-putt of a helicopter and a quicker, higher sound. The 
dancers scattered. 

Over the trees two shapes appeared. Neither was moving 
very fast, but they came without warning: the Fuel helicopter 
and a stub-winged STOL plane, one they had not seen in the air 
before. They did not come in peace. Soldiers strapped to the 
pods of the helicopter were firing incendiary rockets, while 
wing-mounted machine guns on the STOL strafed the camp. 
The fixed-wing plane made a roaring run that took it out over 
the water, then rose, turned and dived in again. On its second 
pass the guns did not fire, but four tiny rockets leaped out from 
under the wing and streaked down into the stores shed and set 
fire to a row of tents. 

The Greasies had not been so slow after all. 

Here and there around the camp, and inside it, perimeter 
guards and the more quick-witted of the dancers were 
beginning to return the fire. Margie jumped to her feet and 
began to run toward the nearest rocket launcher, and then the 
stub-winged plane on its third pass swerved toward her. It was 
using both machine guns and a flame thrower now. As the 
bullets stitched toward her, Margie dodged and fell, almost 
beside the Krinpit: and the creature rose up high above her. It 
launched itself, two hundred kilograms of half-moulted body, 
on top of Marge Menninger. 

• • 

S HARN-IGON KNEW THAT this would be his last 
moult, terribly premature, agonizing, fruitless. He 
would never experience the satisfying itch of his new 
carapace as it hardened and stretched over the soft 
inner pulp, never feel the sexual stirring of the newly shelled 
and embark on the quick contest of a female with a he-mate. As 
the Poison Ghosts Above had zoomed in toward the camp, he 
had tried to warn these new allies. But they were deaf to the 
brilliant sounds from over the trees, deaf to his warnings. 

The pain was too much. 

It had been his intention to assist them in killing each other 
to the maximum extent possible, and then himself to kill the 
survivors. But perhaps he had done all of the assisting he 
would ever do. The agony of his new shell, already beginning to 
crack again, tormented his thoughts. The blinding sounds of 
the aircraft and the explosions dazed him. 

There was only one Poison Ghost left that he could kill. It 
would have to be enough. He raised himself on his 
painfully soft-shelled limbs, leaned forward and crashed down 
on top of her just as the soft, deadly tongue of the flame 
thrower licked at them both. 

By then the whole camp was firing at the aircraft, or that 
much of it that was still able to fire. But the planes were out of 
reach. They hung out over the water, a kilometer and more 
away, the helicopter dancing lightly, the STOL turning in small 
circles, and did not return to the attack. 

The next assault came from another place. 

A scream from one of the machine gun pits, and the two 
soldiers in it were down, ripped to shreds, and out of the pit 
came a long, limber black shape wearing tiny goggles and 
racing its dozen limbs to the nearest knot of humans; and 
another behind him, and another. 

The borrowers managed to kill more than ten of the 
survivors. But that was all. Even with the sun-glasses they 
were no match for trained human soldiers on the surface of the 



Barclay Shaw 




planet. If the planes had continued their attack — but they 
didn’t. The human defenders quickly rallied and at the end 
there were fifty borrowers stretched out on the ground, soiling 
the sand with their watery black blood. No more came because 
there were no more in the nest to come. That burrow had been 
wiped out. 

Dan Dalehouse stood peering out over the sea while one of 
Cheechee Arkashvili’s assistants bandaged a deep gash in his 
arm. The planes were gone. In the middle of everything, they 
had quietly flown down the coastline and away. “And why 
didn’t they finish us off?” he asked. There was no answer. 



XXI 

Y THE TIME THEY FOUND Margie Menninger still 
alive, the fight was long over, and the camp was 
almost functioning again. 

She had lain under the dead and stinking Krinpit 
for more than two hours, stunned, half suffocated, unable to 
shift the gross dead weight on top of her, her limbs twisted 
painfully but unhurt. Like the djinn in the bottle, at first she 
would have given a king’s ransom to her rescuer. When they 





50 



finally heard her sand-gagged attempts at a bellow and dug her 
out, what she wanted to give was death. 

They helped her a few steps away, with their heads averted 
from the stink. She gagged and swore at them and when they 
tried to help her to stand she collapsed and vomited into the 
sand again. The doctor came running, but a doctor wasn’t what 
Marge needed. What she needed was to get the cesspool 
stench of the Krinpit off her and out of her nostrils. She let 
Cheechee strip off her coveralls and assist her to the edge of 
the water and then she splashed around until the smell was 
gone and she could walk again. Limpingly, yes. But under her 
own power. Wearing a bra and bikini panties, with her gunbelt 
over her shoulder, she walked up the shore past the dead 
Krinpit, seared into a sort of omelette of meat and shell, until 
someone came up with a terrycloth robe, giving orders as she 
walked. 

Why had they stopped? 

The camp had been at their mercy. With great precision they 
had knocked out the heavy weapons on the first pass. There 
was not a rocket launcher or a machine gun untouched, nothing 
but hand weapons. Of the hundred and eight persons in the 
food camp, twenty-two were dead, nearly fifty were wounded 
or burned. The planes had been unscathed. The burrowers had 
been wiped out entirely, but if the planes had finished their 
work first, the borrowers would have had an easy time with the 
survivors. Why? The timing had been exact. As soon as the 
planes stopped shooting, the burrowers came out. That could 
not have been a coincidence, and the goggles the burrowers 
wore were proof that the Greasies had prepared them for the 
job. But then they hadn’t followed through. 

Why not? 

But thank God for Poppa and his parting gift! A metric tonne 
of ammunition had been blown up but there were metric tonnes 
left untouched by virtue of the spare supplies in the final ship. 
Tents were burned and food destroyed. But there was more. If 
Cappy’s airplane had been stitched across by machine gun fire, 
there were spare parts to fix it. And that greatest of gifts, the 
six kilograms of Pu 235 in its carefully crafted sheaths, that was 
still intact. The deaths were irreplaceable, of course. Worse 
still were the casualties because some of them were not merely 
a loss but a debit: Nguyen Dao Tree, who had lost a leg and a 
lot of blood to go with it; six persons badly burned, two others 
with serious abdominal wounds — a whole cluster of damages 
for Cheechee Arkashvili to try to repair. For each one of the 
worst off, there was the cost of an able-bodied person to tend 
him. There was no tent still standing big enough to hold them 
all, and so Cheechee had put them onto cots dragged out of the 
damaged tents, out in the open; some of the bedding was 
scorched, and if it began to rain again they would be in 
trouble. But for now they were as well off as they were likely to 
be, Margie thought as she moved among them. 

One of them got up as Margie approached: Lieutenant 
Kristianides, one whole side of her body in gauze and anti-burn 
dressing. But functioning. “Colonel,” she said, “1 had to leave 
the radio — ” 

Marge glanced at the doctor, who shook her head. “Get back 
in bed, Kris. Tell me about it later.” 

“No. I’m all right. When they shot the tent up I ran out. But 1 
left the tape going. I was getting their chatter, only it was in all 
different languages.” 

“Thanks. Now get back in bed,” Marge ordered and looked 
around. “Dalehouse, front and center!” she called. “Check the 
radio shack. If the tape’s still working, give me a yell.” 

He didn’t look too good himself, she thought, as he put down 
the tray of dressings and headed up the hill without a word, but 
none of them did. Especially herself. Margie’s own tent had 
been one of the totaled, and what she was wearing was fatigues 
belonging to a woman who would never again need them — not 
unfair, but she had been a taller and fatter woman than Marge 
Menninger. 

When Dalehouse called her, she had forgotten about the 



tapes. But she went up to the shack, unburned and not really 
harmed except for bullet-holes, commandeering Ana Dimitrova 
on the way. The tape was voice-actuated and Dalehouse had 
already found the right place to begin. Ana put on the 
earphones and began to translate. 

“First one of the pilots says, ‘On target,’ and the base 
acknowledges. Then there are some carrier noises as though 
they were going to transmit and changed their minds, and then 
the base says, ‘Suspend operations at once. Do not attack.’ And 
one of the pilots, I think it is the Egyptian, says in a different 
Arab dialect, ‘Strike already in progress. We have taken out 
their weapon dump. Body count around twenty-five.’ Then 
there is some mumbling that I cannot make out, as though they 
are talking at the base with the transmitter on but not close 
enough to pick it up. And then the base says, ‘Urgent. Suspend 
operations immediately.’ And then the other pilot, the 
Irishman, says they are observing from over the water, waiting 
for instructions, and then the base orders them to return 
without further attack. That is all there is on the tape until they 
get landing instructions later on.” 

“That’s it?” Margie asked. 

“As I have said. Colonel, yes. There is nothing else.” 

“Now why would they change their minds in the middle?” 
Margie asked. Neither Dalehouse nor Dimitrova offered an 
answer. She hadn’t expected one. It didn’t matter. The 
Greasies had declared war and if they backed out in the middle 
of it, that was their problem, not hers. She would not back out. 
To Marge Menninger the attack on her base — her 
base! — answered all questions right there. “Why” didn’t 
really matter. The only question was how — how to carry the 
fight to them, and win it. 

“Can you dig with that shoulder?” she asked Dalehouse. 

“I guess so. It’s not bleeding.” 

“Then go help Kappelyushnikov dig graves, Dimitrova, 
you’re a radio operator now. No transmissions. Just listen. If 
the Greasies say anything, I want to hear about it right away.” 

She left them and headed for the surviving latrine. She didn’t 
particularly need to go to the bathroom, she just wanted to be 
alone for a moment to clarify her thoughts. She ranked her way 
to the head of the line, closed the door and sat there, smoking a 
cigarette and staring into space. 

There was no question in her mind that she could win this 
war, because she had some powerful cards to play. The plutoni- 
um store was one of them. The other was Major Vandermeer’s 
little dispatch case. There were still four birds in orbit and one 
could hit the Greasy main camp and the other their Farside 
base any time she gave the order and that would be that. 

The trouble was, she didn’t want to destroy the Greasy 
facilities. She wanted to acquire them. The birds and the bomb 
were overkill, like trying to take care of a mosquito with a 
mortar. In the first fury after the attack, if she had had that 
button handy to push she would have pushed it; but, by the 
time they dug her out from under the Krinpit, she had decided 
to wait. 

No. It would have to be a straight overland operation. 
Maybe the plutonium, if it could be placed exactly right. Not 
the missiles. It was a pity the Greasies had launched their 
preemptive strike before she was quite ready to launch hers. 
But not a disaster. The worst thing about the raid was that her 
cadre of effectives had been seriously reduced. How was she 
going to mount her retaliatory strike without grunts? 

Marge Menninger had just taken the one decision that gave 
the human race a future on Jem, even though she didn’t know 
it. 

• • 

T he only good thing about all this,” Dalehouse 
said to Kappelyushnikov, “is that most of the 
casualties were military. At least now we can get on 
with the real business of the expedition.” 
Kappelyushnikov grunted and threw a few more spadefuls of 



dirt before he anwered. “Of course, is so,” he said, pausing 
and wiping sweat off his face. “Only one question. What is real 
business of expedition?” 

“To survive! And to preserve. God knows what’s happening 
on Earth. We may be all that’s left of the human race, and if 
anything’s going to be left of, what, maybe five thousand years 
of science and literature and music and art, it’s here.” 

“Very discouraging amount of responsibility for two 
grave-diggers,” Kappelyushnikov commented. 

“You are of course right, Danny. We have saying in Soviet 
Union, ‘Longest journey begins with single step.’ What step do 
we take now?” 

“Well—” 

“No, wait, was rhetorical question. First step is apparent. 
Have finished covering up graves of now-absent friends, so 
you. Danny, please step up to colonel’s headquarters and 
report burial services can begin.” 

He jammed his spade into the dirt and sat down, looking 
more despondent than Dalehouse had ever seen him. 

Dalehouse said, “All right. We’re all pretty tired and shook 
up. 1 guess.” 

The pilot shook his head, then looked up and grinned. “Am 
not only tired, dear Danny, am also very Russian. Heavy load to 
carry. We have other saying in Soviet Union, ‘In thousand 
years, what difference will it make?’ But now I tell you the 
truth, Danny. All sayings are bullshit. I know what we do, you 
and I and all of us. We do the best we can. Is not much, but is 
all there is.” 

Dalehouse laid down his spade and trudged up the hill to the 
headquarters shack, thinking hard. A heavy responsibility! 
When you looked at it carefully, there was no way to preserve 
everything: so much that was irreplaceable would inevitably be 
lost. Probably already was lost: There was not much chance 
that the Arc de Triomphe and the British Museum and the 
Parthenon all survived, not to mention some billions of fairly 
irreplaceable human beings. It was hard for Danny to accept 
that he would never again see a ballet or listen to a concert. Or 
fly in a clamjet or drink in a revolving restaurant on top of a 
skyscraper. So much was gone forever! And so much more 
would inevitably vanish as they tried to rebuild . 

Yet there was one great asset not yet destroyed: hope. They 
could survive. They could rebuild. They could even rebuild in a 
better way, learning from the mistakes of the past, on this 
virgin planet — 

There was a knot of people gathering around the 
headquarters shack, and Marge Menninger, with a couple of 
her aides, was trotting up to join them. Dalehouse hurried his 
pace and arrived in time to hear Ana saying, “This message 
just came in,. Colonel Menninger. I will play the tape for you.” 

“Do it,” snapped Marge, out of breath and exhausted. 
Dalehouse moved closer to her. She seemed near to collapse. 
But as the tape player hummed and scratched, she pulled 
herself together and stood listening intently. 

Danny recognized the voice. It was the black Air Vice 
Marshal. Pontrefact; and what he said did not take very long. 

“This is an official message on behalf of the Fuel Exporting 
Powers to the Food camp. We offer an immediate and 
permanent armistice. We propose that you remain within 
twenty kilometers of your camp, in the direction toward ours, 
and we will observe the same limits from ours. We request an 
answer within one hour.” 

There was a pause, as though he were shuffling papers in his 
hand, and then the rich Jamaican tones began again: 

“As you are aware, our airstrike against your camp was 
provoked by your destruction of our satellites. It was ordered 
only after full exploration of all alternatives. Our intention was 
to wipe your base out completely. However, as you are also 
aware, we terminated the strike after inflicting relatively minor 
damage on your base. The reason for this decision is the reason 
for this offer of armistice now. 

“Our star, Kung, is unstable. It is about to flare. 



“We have been aware for some time that its radiation level 
has been fluctuating. Within the past twenty-four hours it has 
become more extreme. While the air strike was in progress, we 
received information from our astrophysicists that a major flare 
will occur in the near future. We do not have an exact time. Our 
understanding is that it may occur as early as forty-eight hours 
from now and almost surely within the next two weeks. If you 
apcept our offer of armistice, we will transmit all technical data 
at once and your people can make their own judgments.” 

The voice hesitated, then resumed in a less formal way. “We 
have no knowledge of conditions on Earth at present, and 
suppose you have none as well. But it is clear that, for all 
practical purposes, we on Jem are alone in the universe at this 
time. We think we will need all the resources we have to 
prepare our camp for this flare. If we continue to fight, we 
suppose we will all die. I do not propose that we work together. 
But I propose that we stop fighting, at least until this crisis is 
past.” Another pause. Then: “Please respond within an hour. 
God help us all.” 

Margie closed her eyes for a moment while everyone waited. 
Then she opened them and said, “Call them back, Dimitrova. 
Tell them we accept their offer, ask for their technical data' at 
once and say we will be in contact again when we have 
something to say. Folks, the war is over.” 



Ten minutes later the whole camp knew it. Margie had gone 
on the public-address system, played the tape from Marshal 
Pontrefact and broken the news of the disaster and the truce. 
She had called a general meeting for oh three hundred hours, 
about ninety minutes from then, and ordered Alexis Harcourt, 
the nearest thing they had left to an astronomer, to go over the 
data from the Greasies and report before that time. Then she 
turned to Danny Dalehouse and said, “I don’t have a bed 
anymore but I need about an hour’s sleep real bad.” 
“There’s a spare in my tent.” 

“I was hoping you’d ask.” She peered up toward the sullen 
glow in the clouds where Kung was hiding and shook her head. 
“It’s been a son of a bitch of a day,” she said as they picked 
their way toward a tent row. “And it’s not over yet. Know what 
I’m going to do at the meeting?” 

“Am 1 supposed to guess?” 

“No way, Danny. You’d never make it. I’m going to 
announce the impending retirement of Colonel Marjorie 
Menninger from active service.” 

••What?" 

“Pick your teeth up, Danny, and don’t just stand there,” she 
advised, tugging him along. “We’re going to convert this place 
to civilian government, effective as soon as the emergency is 
over. Or maybe before. I don’t care. Maybe all you guys that’re 
bitching about the Army way of doing things are right. I have 
to say that my way hasn’t been working out too well, everything 
considered. So 1 think we’re going to need elections for a new 
government, and if you want my advice, you’ll run.” 

“For what? Why Me? Margie, you get me all mixed up!” 
“Why you? Because you’re practically the only original 
settler left, you know that? Just you and Cappy. Because 
nobody hates your guts. Because you’re the only person in the 
camp with the age and experience to handle the job of running 
things and who isn’t a soldier. Don’t let me pressure you, it’s 
your decision. But you’ve got . my vote. If,” she added in a 
different tone, “anything we decided makes any difference at 
all now.” 

They were at his tent and Marge paused at the flap, staring 
up at the sky. “Oh, shit,” she said. “It’s beginning to rain.” 
It was, big drops, with promise of more behind them. “The 
casualties!” he said. 



52 



“Yeah. We’re going to have to get them under cover. And 
that’s a pity, Danny, because 1 was kind of hoping we could 
catch us a little R&R before the meeting.’’ 

In spite of everything, Danny could not help himself. He 
laughed out loud. “Marjorie Menninger, you are some kind of 
strange. Get in there and get some sleep.” But before she 
turned, he put his arms around her for a moment. “1 never 
would have thought it of you,” he said. “What converted you 
to civilian values?” 

“Who’s converted?” Then she said, “Well, maybe it was 
that fucking Krinpit. If it hadn’t been for him, you’d have been 
burying me a little while ago, too. I didn’t trust him either, but 
he gave his silly life to save me.” 



• • 

W ITH SO FEW OF THEM left, they didn’t really 
need the P.A. system to cope with fify-five or sixty 
persons listening, but they hooked in one speaker 
for the benefit of the casualties who were well 
enough to hear, in their tents down the hill. The rest sat or 
stood on the wet planks of the dance floor, in the sullen, steady 
rain, while Marge Menninger spoke to them from the little 
dais. She turned the stage over to Harcourt. 

He said, “A lot of the data from the Greasies isn’t 
astronomy, it’s geology. They’ve done a lot of digging. They 
say there seem to be flare episodes every twenty or thirty 
years. There’s no set pattern, but by the amount of ash and 
char they think your average flare involves about a seventy-five 
per cent increase in radiation averaged out over a period of a 
week or more. That’s enough to kill us. Partly heat. Mostly 
ionizing radiation. 

“Now, when does it happen? Their best guess is ten 
days — give or take ten days.” There was a murmur from the 
audience and he nodded. “Sorry about that, but I don’t have 
the training to make it any closer than they do. In fact. I’m only 
taking their word. The picture 1 get is of slowly increasing heat 
over a period of a couple of weeks. I think we’ve been having 
that, and maybe it’s why the weather has been so lousy. Then 
the flare. Surface temperature goes up to maybe three-fifty 
degrees. That’s absolute — say, somewhere between where we 
are now and the boiling point of water. I don’t think it goes over 
that, not for very long, anyway. But there are peak flares and 
they’re like striking a match. If anything can burn, it will. 
Apparently the forests bum but maybe not right away — they’d 
probably have to dry out first. Then the flare recedes, 
temperature comes down, the air drops our moisture and you 
get rain to put out the fires. Probably a hell of a lot of rain, over 
a period of weeks or months. Then you’re back to normal.” 
“Only dead,” somebody called out from the audience. 
Harcourt spread his hands defensively. 

“Maybe not. If you’re in shelter, you might survive.” He 
started to continue, then stopped himself. Margie came up 
beside him. 

“You don’t sound too confident.” * 

“I’m not. The — ah, the geological record doesn’t inspire 
much confidence. The Greasies took cores from more than a 
hundred different sites and they all showed the same pattern, 
recurring char and soil, back up for thousands of years.” 
Dalehouse stood up. “Alex,” he called, “why hasn’t it killed 
off everything on the surface of Jem long ago?” 

“You’re asking for a guess? I guess it has. At least all the 
vegetation. It burns off, then regrows from roots, most likely. 
Seeds probably would survive, though. And those drenching 
rains after each flare would give the new growth a good start in 
fertile soil — the char’s great fertilizer; primitive man used to 
slash and burn to get his farms started, back on Earth. I don’t 
know about the animals. I’d guess the Creepies would be all 
right in their tunnels, if they didn’t starve to death waiting for 
new growth to live on. Probably a lot of them do. Maybe the 



same for the Krinpit, because it would take a lot to kill them off. 
They don’t have to worry about being blinded by the radiation 
because they don’t have any eyes to begin with. And those 
shells are pretty good armor for their vital organs. Probably get 
a lot of mutations, but in the long run that’s as much good as it 
is bad for the race.” 

“What about Charlie?” 

“1 don’t know. That’s harder. I guess a really good flare 
might wipe out damn near all the adults. But that’s when they 
spawn, and the spawn might survive. Also, no doubt, with a lot 
of mutations. I’d say evolution moves pretty fast here.” 
“Well, look,” Margie cut in. “If all these things can survive, 
why can’t we?” 

Harcourt shrugged. “They’re adapted, we’re not. Besides, 
I’m talking about races surviving, not individuals. Maybe as 
few as one per cent live through it. Maybe less.” He looked 
around the audience. “One per cent of us leaves how many?” 
he asked. 

“Yeah,” Margie said slowly. “Well, I think we get the 
picture. We need to get under something big enough to stop 
both heat and radiation, and we need to do it in a hurry. Got 
any ideas on what we can make a roof out of?” 

Harcourt hesitated. “Not a clue,” he confessed. “Certainly 
the tents won’t do it. Oh, and I should mention the winds. They 
probably get pretty fierce, with all that isolation. So anything 
we did build would have to stand up to maybe two hundred 
k.p.h. hurricanes. Maybe more. I, uh, I thought for a minute of 
using the Creepies’ tunnels, and that might work. For some of 
us, anyway. But I doubt that more than ten per cent of us would 
live through maybe two or three weeks underground, without 
very good ventilation and certainly no air conditioning — and 
that air down there is going to get hot. 

There was a silence while everyone considered possibilities. 
Then Kappelyushnikov came forward. “Is one thing we can 
do,” he announced. “Not many of us. Maybe fifteen, twenty. 
Can get in return capsule and go into orbit.” 

“It’s just as hot there,” Marge Menninger protested. 

Cappy shook his head. “Is only radiation. Steel hull reflects 
ninety-nine per cent maybe. Anyway, plenty. Only problem — 
who decides which twenty lucky people go up?” 

Marge Menninger thought for a moment, then said, “No, 
that’s a last-ditch, Cappy. There’s another problem with it: 
What do all those lucky fellows do when they come down 
again? There aren’t enough of us left now. I don’t think twenty 
would be enough to survive. If we went up — strike that; I’m not 
saying I would be one of the ‘we.’ If anyone went up, it’d be 
just as smart to keep on going. Try to get back to Earth. Maybe 
go to one of the other colonies. The chances would be as good 
as coming back here, when the whole planet’s fried.” 
Harcourt nodded but then corrected automatically, “Not the 
whole planet.” 

“What?” 

“Well, only half the planet. Our half. The part that faces 
Kung. The far side probably wouldn’t even notice there was a 
flare going on. That’s no good for us,” he went on quickly, 
“because we can’t live there; we don’t have time to build an 
airtight, heated dome and move everything — what’s the 
matter?” 

Margie had burst out laughing. “Son of a bitch,” she said. 
“Shows how wrong you can be when you start trying to trust 
people. Those bastard Greasies aren’t giving us a square 
count! They didn’t stop fighting because they wanted to make 
peace. They stopped becuase we were as good as dead 
anyway!” 

“But — but so are they — ” 

“Wrong! Because they have a Farside base!” She shook her 
head ruefully. “Folks,” she said, “1 was going to make a real 
magnanimous announcement about turning the reins over to 
civilian government, only now I think that’s going to 
have to wait. We’ve got a military job to do first. When this 
side of the planet goes, they’ve got that snug little nest on the 



side that never gets radiation from Kung anyway, and they 
couldn’t care less if the son of a bitch blows up. That’s going to 
be a nice place to be. And we’re going to take it away from 
them." 



XXII 

T hese were the mesas and canyons of the high 
desert. Danny Dalehouse had flown over them in less 
than an hour and seen them only as quaint patterns in 
an unimportant carpet beneath. Marching over them 
was something else. Kappelyushnikov ferried them in as close 
as he dared, three at a time, once four, with the little biplane 
desperately slow to wallow off the ground. He made more than 
a dozen round trips and saved them a hundred kilometers of 
cutting through jungle. Even so, it was a three-day march and 
every step hard work. 

Nevertheless. Dalehouse had not felt as well in weeks. In 
spite of bone-bruising fatigue. In spite of the star that might 
explode at any moment. In spite of the fact that Marge 
Menninger’s shopping list had overlooked a supply of spare 
hiking boots, and so he limped on a right foot that was a mass 
of blisters. He was not the unluckiest. Three of the effectives 
had been unable to go on at all. “We’ll come back for you,” 
Margie had promised; but Dalehouse thought she lied, and he 
could see it in the eyes of the casualties that they were certain 
of it. 

And still he would have sung as he marched, if he had had 
breath enough for it. 

It had been raining on and off for nearly forty hours. Mean, 
wind-driven rain that kept them sodden in the steamy heat, 
even when it let up, and chilled when it drenched them. That 
didn’t matter either. It was regrettable because it meant that 
Charlie and the two remaining members of his flock could not 
keep in touch with them visually. And he had had to take the 
radio away from the balloonist before they left — far too easy for 
the Greasies to intercept. Whenever the clouds lightened, 
Dalehouse searched the sky for his friend. He never saw him, 
never heard his song, but he knew he was up there somewhere. 
It wasn’t serious. The weather that kept Charlie from scouting 
danger for them kept the Greasies from providing it. 

There were twelve of them still toiling toward the Greasy 
camp. They had left the rest of the survivors — the highly 
impermanent survivors if this expedition didn’t do what it was 
supposed to — back at the base with orders to look as though 
they were twice as numerous as they were. Margie herself had 
transmitted the last message to the Greasies: “We are 
beginning construction of underground shelters. When the 
flare is over we can discuss a permanent peace. Meanwhile, if 
you approach, we will shoot on sight.” Then she pulled the 
plug on the radio and crawled into Cappy’s plane for the last 
ferry trip. 

They had less than ten kilometers to go — a three-hour stroll 
under good condidtions. but it would take them all of a day. It 
was scramble down one side of a ravine and crawl up the other; 
peer over the top of a crest and scuttle down its other face. Not 
just the terrain. They were all heavily loaded. Food, water, 
weapons, equipment. Everything they would need they had to 
carry on their backs. 

The red cylinders marked “Fuel Elements — Replacement” 
were the worst. Each cylinder contained a hundred of the tiny 
clad needles and weighed more than a kilogram. Twelve of 
them made a heavy load. 

At the end of the first march, Margie had gone through the 
party, checking loads. When she came to Ana Dimitrova, 
sitting hugging her knees next to Danny Dalehouse, she said 
softly, “Are you sterile?” 

“What? Really! What a question!” But then Margie shook 
her head. 

“Sorry. I’m just tired. I should have remembered that you 



53 

aren’t.” And she grinned and winked again at both Dalehouse 
and Ana; but when they picked up packs again Ana’s load was 
changed to water flasks and limping old Marguerite Moseler 
was carrying the fuel rods. 

Margie looked terrible and at every stop she seemed to look 
worse. Her plumpness was long gone. The bone structure of 
her face showed for the first time in years and her voice was a 
rasp. More than that, her complexion was awful. When the 
Krinpit buried her for two hours its moulting juices overrode 
her defenses. A day later she had broken out in great purplish 
blotches, and had a skin discoloration like sunburn. She said it 
did not hurt; there, too, Dalehouse thought she lied. 

But he thought she was telling the truth about one very 
important thing, and perhaps that was the reason he could not 
repress a feeling of cheer. The bomb they were carrying would 
not be used. 

He had been the one to propose it and she had accepted the 
idea at once. “Of course,” she said. “1 don’t want to destroy 
their camp. 1 want it, all of it — not only for us but for the future 
of the human race on Jem. The bomb’s best use is as a threat, 
and that’s what we’ll use it for.” 

He said as much to Ana at their last halt before coming in 
sight of the Greasy base. “She’s planning for future 
generations. At least she thinks it’s worth keeping your 
chromosomes intact.” 

“Of course,” said Ana, surprised. “1 have that confidence 
too.” And so. Danny Dalehouse was discovering, did he. Bad 
as things were, he had hope. It carried him through that last 
belly-crawl, three hundred meters in the drenching rain, into 
the muddy cave that was their point of entrance for the 
borrower tunnels under the Greasy base. It sustained him 
while Major Vandenour and Kris Kristianides painfully and 
gingerly assembled the parts of the detonator and fitted the 
fuel rods into it. It survived after Margie and Vandenour and 
two others wiggled their way into the abartdoned courses and 
disappeared from sight. The part of his life, of all their lives, 
that they were living through was misery and fear. Maybe 
worse than that, it was self-reproach; they were doing 
something that Dalehouse could not think of as noble or even 
tolerable. It was a holdup. Armed robbery. No better than a 
mugging. But it would be over. And a better time would come! 
And that hope kept time going for two full hours after Margie 
and the others had crawled away. Until Kris Kristianides, 
looking scared and harried, checked her watch and said: 
“That’s it. From now on everybody stay inside. Face the wall. 
Hands over your eyes. When the fireball comes, don't look up. 
Wait ten minutes at least. I’ve got goggles. I’ll tell you when 
you — ” 

Then they drowned her out, Dalehouse first and loudest. 
“She’s going to do it! But she promised — ” 

“Shit, Dalehouse, she couldn’t keep that promise! The 
Greasies would think it was a bluff. She’s going to take out 
their arms and food, just like we planned, and then we’ll move 
in and wipe them up.” 

“What insanity!” cried Ana. “There’ll be nothing there! 
The fallout will kill us if we go into the camp.’’ 

“Maybe. I’ve got a counter. We’ll check everything out. The 
important thing’s the planes. If we get them, we can get to 
their base on Farside.” She hesitated. She had been carefully 
rehearsed in all this and had carried the secret with her for 
more than a day. But she had dreaded this moment. If it were 
not for her burns, she would have been in the warrens with the 
colonel and the major, and a lot happier there than she was 
here. “Anyway,” she finished, “there’s nothing we can do 
about it now. She’ll blow the bomb in the next ten minutes. Get 
your faces down!” 

And then, at last, hope was dead. 

• • 

For the Brood Mother, too, all hope was gone. Blind and 
alone, she moved slowly down through the tunnels, to the only 



54 



place left for her to be. 

The thirty-meter level was for pups and outcasts. It was a 
place to play growing-up games or, at the end of all games, a 
place to die. Mother dr’Shee had never been there before. She 
had been a biddable pup, trained early to responsibility. As a 
tiny thing she had found it tingly-thrilling to listen to the stories 
of the half-growns, shivering in delight as she groped for the 
teat in her nurse’s sheltering silk. But she had never explored 
the adventurous levels for herself. Not once. She had known 
that the time would come soon enough when, at the end of her 
life, she would drag herself down to see those old, unvisited 
levels, and die. 

In that she had been partly wrong. It was time to die, and she 
was there, but she could not see. 

With dignity, the Brood Mother raised her forebody to its 
fullest stretch and called, “Is anyone near?” 

There was no reply. No sound. No scent except the stale, 
spoiled smell of elders long dead. She tried again, not because 
she had any hope of being answered, but for the sake of being 
methodical: “Person or pup, can anyone hear my voice?” 

Nothing. If there had been an answer, it could have been 
only one of the wild young males that roamed the upper 
corridors, seeking only to kill. But there was not even that. 

.So another of her senses had become useless to her. Hearing 
meant nothing when there was nothing to hear. 

It was a pity she was blind, but she bore no malice toward the 
Two-Legs who had burned out her eyes with their stroboscopic 
lights^ She had in any case revenged herself against a number 
of them in advance — for poisoning her tunnels, for abducting 
her young, for perverting the brood into new and vile practices. 
Most of all for coming to disturb her life in the first place. She 
had fought against it all, against the Two-Legs and sometimes 
against members of her own brood, turned against her by the 
new ways of the Two-Legs. And now the tunnels were empty, 
and she was blind. Tssheee! It would have been less — less final 
to be here and alone if she could have seen at least an 
occasional phosphorescent glimmer of fungus or decay. What 
was left of her senses? Taste no longer mattered. 
There was little to eat. Smell unrewarding, with neither males 
nor pups to nuzzle. She could still feel the powdery dust floor 
beneath her. the curving wall at her side. Dr’Shee took comfort 
from being tightly enclosed, as she had been through all the 
happiest parts of her life. 

Which was now over. 

She stretched and sighed a feline, purring sound of despair. 
She was beginning to be very hungry. 

The Two-Legs had ruined most of the food stores when they 
poisoned the tunnels to get at her and her few surviving allies. 
But the tunnels stretched ten kilometers in ail directions. 
Somewhere there would be something in this immense 
engineered warren that had been her world. She did not 
seriously think of seeking it. A Brood Mother did not debase 
herself to prolong a life that was over. 

— woomp — 

The tunnel around her moved. 

It was not a shake or a tremor but a deliberate and almost 
peristaltic movement. Mother dr’Shee had never before 
experienced such a thing. Burrows sometimes crumbled, 
Krinpit invaded them, the rains might wash through a roof. But 
for all the earth to move? Such a thing could not happen! For 
the Brood Mother such an event was exactly as disquieting as it 
would have been for a fish to scull its tail and yet not move, or 
for a human being to feel the air about him turn glassy and 
shatter. 

And then, from thirty meters above and more than a 
kilometer away, she heard the sound that followed. It was more 
than a sound, it was a pressure in the air that stung her ears 
and left them filled with a distant, discordant chatter, like the 
peeping of a hungry litter. But there were no pups to cry for 
her. ever again. 



F or some reason MARGIE’S right knee was only 
scraped and sore while the left one was bloodily 
gouged, the leg of the coverall worn through, the skin 
itself long since rubbed away. It was harder and 
harder for her to keep up with the two ahead of her. God had 
not intended her to crawl through tunnels ninety centimeters 
high for hours on end... whichever God she meant was not quite 
clear. To spare her knee she tried for a while a three-legged 
gait, putting a little weight on her left toes, the rest on the right 
leg and hands. That was a bummer. She wound up with the 
worst cramp she ever had in the calf of her leg. She had to stop 
and press it out while Vandenour, behind her, almost caught 
up and the two ahead kept on going. So then she speeded her 
pace and ripped the knee still more. 

She paused and glanced at her watch. Still more than a 
quarter of an hour before the device would go off. Before that 
time the two grenades they had left at bends in the tunnels 
would bring down enough dirt to tamp the explosion, and they 
were a good kilometer away by now. Probably far enough for 
survival, if not comfort. “Take ten.” she shouted. She rolled 
over and rested her limbs, breathing hard of the stale and 
tainted air. Funny, it was not really dark in the tunnels. That 
she had not expected. Once her eyes had adjusted, she could 
see little will-o’-the-wisp lights, so faint and pale that they had 
hardly any color at all; swamp gas, foxfire, Willis, whatever 
they were, they were welcome. 

She heard a quick, quiet scuffle down the tunnel behind her, 
then a thwuck. 

Silence again. “Van?” she called. “Major Vandenour?” 
The dirt walls swallowed her words and there was no reply. 
Painfully she rolled herself over, turned around and crawled 
back. 

The mouse-dropping odor was very strong. She touched the 
switch of her little helmet light and saw that the major was 
dead. One of the borrowers had'been here, and the dart that 
protruded from Vandenour’s face proved it. 

“Shit.” whispered Margie and belatedly lifted her head and 
drew her pistol. The light showed nothing for sure down the 
crooked, uneven tunnel — was that a glint of something? A 
reflection from an eye? She fired twice. 

When she looked again there was nothing there. But every 
few meters there were little side passages and bays, and a 
dozen Creepies could be waiting there for her to turn her head. 

Almost she raised her voice to cal! the others back but 
stopped herself as she was opening her mouth. For what? They 
could not bring the major’s body back. Doubled over as it 
was — he seemed to have been turning when he was shot — he 
almost blocked the tunnel; and maybe that was the last service 
he could render his cause, to slow down pursuit. 

There was a better way. She had two grenades left. She 
pulled one off her belt, set it to ten clicks, turned around and 
scuttled as rapidly as she could after the others. When she had 
counted a hundred seconds, she dropped, locked her hands 
over the back of her neck and waited for the distant, muffled 
thud that told her she had dropped a part of the tunnel roof 
down to bury the major. 

When the grenade had gone off, it occurred to her that it was 
strange she had not caught up with the others. “Sam! Chotnik! 
Sound off!” she cried. They didn’t answer; they hadn’t heard 
her order to stop. She left the helmet light on and hurried after 
them, the pain in her knee no longer signifying. When the red 
numerals on her watch told her it was time for the nuclear 
blast, she still had not caught up. 

She rolled over on her back again. For this blast it did not 
matter whether she protected her neck. She would be killed or 
she would not. and the only factor that mattered was whether 
there was enough earth between her and the explosion. There 
should be. When the impellers drove the sets of plutonium 
needles in to mesh with each other, there would be a nuclear 
blast. But not a big one. They would not stay in contact for 



more than a few microseconds. If she had placed them right, 
they would expend their force up through the roof of the tunnel, 
carrying the Greasies’ arms stores with them, and not much 
else. If she had placed them right. She was far less sure of that 
than she had pretended to Vandenour and the others. The 
maps that Tinka and the Indonesian had given their lives to get 
to her were extremely complete and clear. But reading them in 
the open air was one thing, trying to follow them as you crawled 
from level to level underground was something quite different. 
She was not even sure that they had followed the same route on 
the way out as going in. They should have drawn a silken cord 
after them, or broken off bits of gingerbread cookies for a 
trace — 

At that moment the explosion occurred. Right on time. And 
she was still alive. 

It was not even frightening. It was, she thought, as it must 
have been in her mother’s womb if her mother had fallen. Some 
external event had taken place. But here in the tunnel she 
moved with the ground and even the sound of the explosion 
was too huge and slow to be frightening. 

So that part of the plan, at least, had worked. Now if Kris 
could rally the patrol to the attack — 

If they remembered their radiation ponchos and the wind 
was not too unfavorable — If the Greasies did not pull 
themselves together fast enough to resist — if the bomb had 
been in the right place after all — There were too many ifs. Her 
place was with her troops, not here. 

A sighing, slithering sound a few meters behind her caught 
her attention. She turned the headlamp toward it and saw that 
a section of the roof had collapsed into the tunnel. 

Shaken loose by the nuclear blast? Maybe. More likely not. 
Creepies had been known to try to trap a foe by plugging 
tunnels before. She was terribly easy to find and follow with the 
trail of blood from her knee. 

It was time to get out of there. Doggedly detaching herself 
from the pain and from the fear that one of them was silently 
creeping up behind her. she resumed her crawl. 

In ten meters her head struck dirt. 

The burrowers had closed both ends of the tunnel. 

She turned on the light again. It was fresh dirt. She whirled 
quickly. Nothing moved behind her. She was alone. 

Margie Menninger said to the wall, ‘‘The most basic human 
fear is of being buried alive.” She waited for a moment, as 
though hoping someone would answer. Then she pulled out her 
pistol with one hand and reached for her entrenching tool with 
the other. It wasn’t there. Suddenly she remembered she had 
left it where they had assembled the bomb. 

Fingers then. 

She dropped the pistol and tore at the dirt plug with her bare 
hands. Furiously. Then in terror. At last because there was 
nothing else for her to do. 

• • 

From horizon to horizon, as far as Charlie could see, there 
was a solid undercast of clouds and taller ones poked up all 
around. The storm was weakening off toward the ocean but 
here, where the Greasy camp lay somewhere below, it had 
been hours since he had seen the ground at all, days since he 
had last seen the little party of his friend ‘Anny. And it was 
impossible to stay on station! At all levels up to ten thousand 
mefers and more the wind was strong and solidly toward the 
Heat Pole, and it dragged him remorselessly away. Charlie 
could read the fraying of the anvil-shaped tops of the 
cumulonimbus; it showed that at fifteen thousand meters there 
was a return flow. But he and the two females that survived of 
his flock were worn and tired. They had lost much lift. It took 
them forever to reach those lofty levels. 

As they labored upward, a new flock came sailing down from 
the Pole and Charlie led his tiny fragment to join it, eager for a 
new audience for his songs about the new friends from Earth, 
hungry to hear songs he had not heard before. It had been long 



and long since he had joined in a proper eisteddfod and his soul 
ached for it. The new flock was small, less than sixty adults, but 
there were voices in it he had never heard and he sang greeting 
toward them with joy. 

White light lashed across them. 

The flare caught them all by surprise. Charlie was one of the 
fortunate ones. He was facing away from the blast and so he 
was not blinded at once. He saw the high cirrus starkly 
outlined, blue-white against the sullen crimson Jemman sky, 
saw the shapes of the new flock picked out in brighter, sharper 
colors than he had ever seen. Minutes later he heard the sound 
and behind him and below a new thundercloud boiled up out of 
the undercast. 

Chorus of welcome became a dirge of pain and fear. Charlie 
could only reply with a lifting song. The seniors of the new flock 
took it up and the swarm dropped ballast, belched swallowed 
hydrogen into their sacs and rose. A few did not. They were not 
merely blind, they were in pain too great to respond. 

Although they were far from the blast, when the winds struck 
the swarm was thrown helter-skelter across the sky. Charlie 
had never felt such gusts before. Always in other storms there 
had been warning, gathering clouds and the deadly play of 
lightning to tell them it was time to swallow hydrogen and ride 
out the storm or soar to escape above it. This time there was no 
warning and no escape. His feeding flaps and winglets felt as 
though they were being tom out at the roots. Captive of the 
huge sail of his surface, he was thrown through the new flock, 
caroming off their seniors, cannoning balloonets out of the way. 

And then, without warning, he felt the familiar creeping 
tension of the surface of his gas-sac and recognized the sweet, 
stinging odor of the females. Oestrus, swarming time, time to 
breed! 

The spinnerets of the females were working furiously now, 
spraying threadlike ova and pheronomes into the air. All 
around Charlie, and for all the males, there was no question 
about what to do next; Hive up, spray milt, soar back and forth 
through the stinging mist while their teats elongated, 
convulsed, spread their seed. The skins of their air-sacs 
tightened, drawing the features of their tiny faces into 
caricatures. Behind the expressions that looked like pain was 
pain. The overtures to sex were no joy to Charlie. They were 
like being locked in an Iron Maiden with acid-tipped spikes. 
Only the relief that came when the semen squirted out made 
the pain end. 

But it was wrong, wrong! 

Charlie sang out his question and his fear, and the new flock 
sang with him. What breeding was this with the flare coming 
from the enemy ground and not the sky? What was this heat 
that smote them like a fist, following on the thunder and the 
wild gales? Charlie could see that in the turbulence most of the 
silklings had been missed by the milt. They were all over the 
sky. Within his own body he could feel it was wrong. Where 
was the bubbling of hydrogen to replenish his sac, 
raidiation-stung out of his body fluids? And what — what was 
this monstrous bubbling cloud that was growing so fast it was 
drawing them all toward it? And that was the question that 
answered all the others and put an end to questions forever for 
Charlie as the searing heat of the nuclear cloud burned out his 
eye-patches, cracked his gas-sac, touched off the hydrogen that 
spilled out, and ended his songs for always. 



XXIII 

A S NUCLEAR EXPLOSIONS WENT, it was incon- 
siderable. Less than a kiloton, it would hardly even 
have been noticed in the multi-megaton blasts that 
scoured the surface of the Earth. When the imploding 
grenades forced the bright plutonium needles out of their 
sheaths to mate, they were in contact for only a few 



microseconds before their own immense reaction drove them 
apart. 

But by then the explosion had occurred. The needles, the 
shell, the walls of the tunnel around them had been vaporized 
to a hot gas, billions of atmospheres pressure, irresistably 
determined to escape. It escaped. Within a few thousandths of 
a second it had formed its pipsqueak fireball, fifty meters 
across, racing upward at five hundred kilometers an hour, 
brighter than Kung, brighter than Earth’s sun, brighter than 
hundreds of them put together. The fireball grew and soared, 
first bright red with its burden of nitric acid, then whitening 
and losing its brightness as it began to cool. 

Even through closed eyes, that stark flare was visible to the 
people huddled in the cave, and the shock -front that swept over 
them shook cave and their bodies. The noise was immense. 
After it, over the echoes, Kris Kristianides was shouting, “Stay 
down! Don’t open your eyes! Wait!” For nearly ten minutes 
she kept them there, and then slowly she peered through 
half-closed lids and the dark goggles and announced that they 
could get up. 

Tentatively they poked their heads over the ridge. Squinting, 
they saw what Marge Menninger had done. 

The nuclear cloud boiled tall through the layers of stratus. It 
had punched its own hole in the rainclouds, but its mushroom 
top was out of sight. Nearer, the Greasy camp seemed hardly 
touched: a shed blown over, a couple of tents burning, people 
moving dazedly around. 

"She — she missed the base!” cried Kris, and Danny 
Dalehouse could not tell whether her tone was angry or glad. 
But what she said was true. The bottom of the blast was half a 
kilometer away from the eamp, toward the Heat Pole. Marge 
had got herself lost. The half of the blast that went into 
explosive pressure had wasted itself on the sand and succulents 
of the steppe. 

But the third that went into heat had done better. The 
nearest persons in the Greasy camp were staggering around, 
blind and in agony. No one had given them goggles. No one 
had warned them not to look toward the blast. 

“Check your pieces,” Kristianides ordered. She had taken 
the goggles off. and under them her eyes were red. But her 
voice was determined. “Put on your cloaks. Let’s go. We’re 
moving in.” 

• • 

Dalehouse stood up and pulled the plastic poncho over his 
head like an automaton. (Would that really protect against any 
fallout at all?) He picked up his recoilless and slapped a 
cartridge into the breech. (Why am I doing this?) He started off 
with the others in a ragged line of skirmish, all nine of them, 
walking slowly toward the Fuel base. 

At every step he was telling himself that it was wrong. 
Wrong tactically: the nuclear blast had knocked out no more 
than a few unfortunates, they were likely to get their heads 
blown off by the survivors. Wrong strategically: they should 
never have allowed themselves to get into this position. And 
wrong, most wrong of all, morally. What kind of world were 
they fighting for, where they killed people without warning? 

Dalehouse looked uneasily back and forth at the others in the 
line. All were staring straight ahead at the Fuel camp. Didn’t 
any of them feel the way he did? 

He stopped in his tracks. “Kris,” he said, “1 don’t want to 
do this.” 

She turned slowly, so that the muzzle of her gun covered 
him. “Move your ass, Dalehouse.” 

“No, wail, Kris. Let’s — ” 

She said tightly, “1 was expecting this from you. We’re 
going in there, all of us. Colonel Menninger set this up, and I’m 
not going to let it go to waste. Now move it.” 

The others had stopped to look at them. None of them spoke, 
only waited, while Dalehouse watched the barrel of the GORR 
come into line with the bridge of his nose. He sighed deeply 



and said. “No. Kris.” And then he stood there as her 
expression changed and hardened and he realized that, yes, 
she was going tp pull the trigger—* 

“Put down your rifle. Lieutenant,” Ana called. She was 
behind Kris and a little to one side, and she had her own gun 
pointed firmly at the leiutenant’s back. “I do not wish to kill.” 
she said. “But I. too, do not want to attack this camp.” 
Dalehouse didn’t wait to see what would happen. He stepped 
forward' and took the GORR from Kristianides’s hands. He 
threw it back over the crest of the hill they had just crossed, and 
then followed it with his own. After a second Ana did the same 
and so, one by one, did the others. “You fucking fools!” Kris 
raged. “They’ll shoot you down like rats!” 

Dalehouse did not answer. He stared toward the Greasy 
camp, where a few persons who were not blind or incapacitated 
had begun to appear. They had weapons, and they were gazing 
at the drama on the hill. 

Dalehouse raised his hands over his head and began to walk 
steadily toward them. Out of the corner of his eye he saw Ana 
doing the same thing. Maybe Kris was right. Maybe one of 
those armed people kneeling in the shelter of a smoldering tent 
would begin to shoot. But it was out of his hands. Whatever 
guilt there was. it would not any more belong to him; and for 
the first time in months, he felt at peace. 



XXIV 

And so, at the last, what can one say of them? What is to be 
said of Marjorie Menninger and Danny Dalehouse and Ana 
Dimitrova — and of Charlie and Ahmed Dulla, or of Sharn-igon 
and Mother dr’Shree? They did what they could. More often 
than not, they did what they thought they should. And what can 
be said of them is what can be said of all persons, human or 
otherwise, at the end: they died. Some survived the fighting. 
Some survived the flare. But in the long run there are no 
survivors. There are only replacements. And time passes, and 
generations come and go. 

And then, what can one say of that beautiful and powerful 
woman named Muskrat Greencloud An-Guyen? 

One can say that she bears the traces of Margie and Nan and 
some of the others. Some through the passage of chains of 
DNA, some only because of what they did or who they were. 
She never knew any of them, of course, because they are all six 
generations dead; she is a replacement. 

Like all of us, she is not a single person. She wears three 
personas, or six, or a hundred if you count the subjective 
memories and stereotypes other persons carry around that bear 
the label “Muskie An-Guyen.” To a former lover, she is the 
sweetly sweaty companion of a weekend at Lake Hell. To her 
grandchildren, she is the docent who leads them through the 
museums and the zoo. To your average registered Republicate 
lot-caster of the Boyne-Feng Metropolitan Area, she is the 
selection judge who supervises the machineries of government. 
Or, actually, of nongovernment. Muskie is one hundred 
percent solidly behind the Six Precepts of the Jemman 
Republics, and No strong central government is the last and 
maybe most important of them. “Government” is a dead 
wickedness to Muskie, burned out in the blast and starved in 
the Desperation. It has been gone from Jem this century and a 
half. No one wants to see that pawkish horror back, least of all 
Muskie. It is as obsolete as armies and indolence and waste. 
Muskie will keep it so, if it demands her last drop of blood as 
well as the utmost sacrifices by her militia volunteers and gift 
acceptors. 

As she walks across the pleasant gardens toward the place 
where she sleeps and keeps her belongings, a short, pale youth 
pushes toward her through the shrubs. He is d’Dalehouse 
Dolphin An-Guyen, and he is one of her sons. He has been 



running. He is breathing hard. Muskie sighs and says, “How 
nice of you to hurry to give me Ring-Greeting, Dolph.” 

He stops and blinks at the pretty Christmas many-tree in the 
center of the garden, with its ring-shaped lights and yellow Star 
of Earth at the top. Obviously he has forgotten about the 
holiday. Muskie sighs again. “Merry Christmas anyway, 
Dolph. 1 know you’re going to reproach me some more. Sit 
down and catch your breath first.” 

They sit on a pressed creepystone bench under a grape 
arbor. (A few raisins had survived the flare-storm under a bunk 
in that Outpost of the People. From the six germinable seeds 
that were found in them had come all the wine on Jem, and this 
arbor.) 

Muskie does not look at her son. She knows that in spite of 
his faults, he is too well brought up to begin before she has 
given him encouragement, and she wants him to feel the peace 
of this place. All around the garden are the statues of the First 
Generation, the eighteen Mothers in gold, the fifty-two Mares 
in crystal, the eighty-nine Fathers in granite quarried from the 
cliffs under the Heat Pole. (The twenty-one survivors who 
contributed no genes to the pool, even by cloning, have statues 
too, but they are ranged outside the park. None of them were 
even mares.) There are further distinctions in the statues. The 
eighty-one survivors who returned from Farside have their 
names picked out in frost-etched silver. The thirty-two who 
survived in the burrows under the Outpost of Food when the 
flare caught them before the ferrying to Farside was complete 
are marked in ruby. And the sixty-seven others — few of them 
viable — who survived the flare in caves, under machines, 
inside space capsules, or wherever they could hide from the 
rage of the star are marked in orange chrysolite, the color of 
flame. That was six generations back. Muskie could have been 
descended from 2* of them, more than a third, but actually only 
eleven are truly her ancestors, with considerable overlap. (For 
instance, she is quintyply each descended from Marjorie 
Menninger, Ana Dimitrova, Nguyen Tree, and Firstborn 
McKenzie, the tiny phocomelic child born to the one woman 
who survived both the nuclear bombing of the Outpost of Fuel 
and the flare. She lived only long enough to bear her damaged 
child, but the child was marvelously fertile.) 

When Muskie feels that this holy place has done all it can for 
her son, she scratches below the waistband of her slacks and 
says, “All right, Dolph, you may as well say it.” 

He cannot wait to get the words out, he is so impatient. “All 
right. I’ll say it! You’ve made a mistake. Mother Muskie. We 
can’t say no to Alphabase!” 

“ ‘Can’t’?” 

He is doggedly stubborn. Even ferocious. “Yes, that’s what 1 
said, can't. It’s a crime against the human race! Jem’s rotting 
away before your eyes. Mother Muskie. This is the best chance 
we’ve ever had to get things going again. They’ve got 
high-energy technology on Alphabase! Do you know what it 
means, what they’re suggesting? They’re able to put ten tons 
standard into the tachyon charge state — we couldn’t do that to 
save our lives.” 

“Dear Dolph,” she begins, sweetly reasonable, “we have 
more pressing problems right here on Jem. Do you know how 
many wild flocks of Loons there are? Krips who still wallow in 
savagery? Creepies unreached and unbenefited. We have a 
duty — ” 

“We have a duty to humanity!” he cries. 

“Yes. Certainly! And we are carrying it out. Our ancestors 
gave their lives to save us, and we are true to the Six Precepts. 
There is no tyrannical government, no coercion, no contending 
nationalities here. We haven’t raped Jem, we’ve wooed it. We 
live off renewable resources, while the Alphs are back to 
industry and the evils of technology.” 

“Dear God,” he shouts, “resources? The quarter-million of 
us don’t begin to scratch the surface of them! Do you know that 
fossil fuel 'is forming faster than we use it?” 

“Good! Proper! That makes it renewable. But be reasonable. 



57 

Dolph dear. Why spoil everyone’s happiness by striving for 
something foolish? Suppose everyone wanted to do what you 
say. Who would mine these fossil fuels?” 

“Krips. Creeps. People. Machines! 1 don’t care. If they don’t 
want to. they should be ordered to!” 

Muskrat is shaken. “You have spoiled my Christmas,” she 
says sorrowfully, and walks away. What a shame! A foolishly 
stubborn boy and her whole holiday was ruined before it had 
rightly begun. Dolph is her favorite son, or often is. She 
admires his tiny, quick body and his bright mind. But what rot, 
really! What a bore! Why can’t he accept paradise like 
everyone else and be happy in it? 

Dolph’s holiday is spoiled, too, and he sits on the 
creepy-stone bench so angry and frustrated that he does not 
even hear the carols beginning. 

A 'es'e fi'eles, 
lae'i 'riumphan'es. 

If only she could be made to understand! The winning of .lem 
had cost so much in blood and pain. Not just in that first terrible 
year. Over and over again, every time Kung had flared in those 
first decades. There had been eight flares since the days of the 
ancestors, and only the last two or three had been fairly 
painless. Plenty of warning. A frenzied rush to ionproof the 
domes and hustle essential perishables inside. A work of 
confinement while the star raged, a year or so of one or another 
kind of scarcity until the planet replenished itself. But that left 
half a dozen sieges of misery, the first worst, but all of them 
catastrophic. Was all that to go for nothing? 

Veni'e a'oremus. 

'Ominum. 

A Creepie overseer darts whickering past him toward the 
many-tree, followed by four noisy Krinpit gardeners in their 
bright red and green Ring-Greeting coats of lacquer. He 
becomes aware of the choir belatedly. 

— save us all from Sa 'an 's power 
When we were gone as 'ray — 

Hell of a season of joy this is, he thinks to himself. Season of 
suicide! Time of deciding to die on the vine while all the rest of 
the galaxy goes on to who knows what triumphs of technology 
and adventure! Glumness battles Christmas inside him. 
Gradually glumness loses. He remembers what the Creepie 
had been carrying — palely glowing ultraviolet strobes — and 
decides to stroll over to the Christmas many-tree. 

The Krinpit are pushing away benches and picnic tables to 
make room, moaning and clattering to themselves; they finish 
and scuttle away. The Creepie positions his strobes and waits 
for orders. On the tree itself, the tethered balloonists are 
singing their little hearts out. 

Schlaf im heilige ruhe, 

Schlaf im heilige ruh ’. 

All around the tree young people like him are removing their 
clothes and slipping in between gaily decorated trunks. “Time 
to start!” they cry: and the Loons begin the jolly, lively “Good 
King Wenceslas.” Obediently the Creepie touches off the 
strobes. The Loons gasp and continue to sing and begin to emit 
their milt, and all under the lovely tree the couples link in the 
traditional Rings. 

And Dolph can stand it no longer. Gloom loses. Christmas 
wins. He flings off his clothing and plunges into the trunks of 
the many-tree. Why fight Utopia? he thinks to himself. And so 
in that moment he completes the process of growing up. And 
begins the process of dying. Which is much the same thing. 

. % 



MAPPING THE ISLAND IN IMAGES 

by Robert Frazier 

The Four Shores 
Beta Bernal, resonant 
orbit, 2080 

1 ) 

like the albatross mating in flight 
the solar panels 
in vast double wingspread 
pinwheel with a titanium whisper 
through the abyssal twilight 
my dreams have turned with them 
these sun-catchers 
lame and unsure in migration 
on the solstice path to tomorrow 

2 ) 

flawless and glass-edged sharp in its curvature 

the Bernal habitat 

a head leaping up from the crouch 

cuts a shadow out of the glare 

in this well space darker than space 

my body sweats inside 

crewing a surface repairs excursion 

yet cools in that soft music 

a haven from an unending diurnal life 

3 ) 

like foxfire in the forest dark 
or like a battery 

hooked to the engines of silent mystery 
my soul recharges 

with the great girthing chain of mirrors 

which bends the sun 

casts the diastolic power of atoms 

to the naked gaseous heart 

of this living artifice we call home 

4 ) 

in the V between two agricultural tori 
my flesh, soul and dreams burn 
in nuclear fusion 
molded into a one-piece future 
a grasping fist 

by the light that falls in quills 
raw and actinic 
a gut-wrenching echo 
of the naked star we adhere to 



Tam Barrett 



59 







Reviews 

edited by 
Noralie Barnett 




MONSTERS IN THE SKY 



by Paolo Maffei 
translated by 

Mirella and Riccardo Giacconi 
MIT Press. $15.00 

Reviewed by Hal Clement 

M AFFEI’S monsters are 
not those of old legend or 
modern tradition, though he 
starts with comets and ends 
with black holes. Most of the items in 
between have names totally strange to 
the average citizen, such as Seyfert 
galaxies and BL Lacertae objects. The 
title is well chosen, however. Most of 
these objects, if they were located 
anywhere near our planet, would cause 
terror among human beings for much 
better reasons than can ever be found in 
astrology: they could crush, vaporize, or 
otherwise dispose of our world with ail 
the casual ease of a superweapon from a 
space-opera yarn of the thirties. 

From my point of view, the best thing 
about the book is its completeness. While 
it is in no sense a collection of mathe- 
matical articles from the Astrophysical 
Journal, it is far more than a sensational 
collection of descriptions. Dr. Maffei goes 
into the observational history of each 
object, gives a clear account of the 
reasoning for and against various inter- 
pretations of what has been seen, and 
where — as is usually the case — there is 
still a fair amount of doubt about what is 
going on, he at least has removed some of 
the wilder possibilities. 

In the comet discussion, for example, 
the pros and cons of the various explana- 



tions for the Siberian explosion of 1908 
are very well covered; 1 approve of the 
discussion, not merely because it reaches 
the conclusion which has been held for a 
long time by most conservative astrono- 
mers — that the impacting object was an 
icy comet nucleus of the Whipple “dirty- 
snowball” variety. 

The various “black hole” interpreta- 
tions of some of the apparently very 
energetic stellar and quasi-stellar objects 
are very well covered, also. 

In a few places, there may possibly be 
translation slips. On p. 156 is the 
statement “main sequence stars are 
heavier and more luminous.” More 
luminous than what? One suspects that 
the author’s intended point was that main 
sequence stars are more luminous the 
heavier (better, more massive) they are. 

On p. 100, the statement is made that 
the time of the demise of the dinosaurs 
can now be narrowed down to no more 
than 10,000 years. 1 wish Dr. Maffei had 
given some idea of how this is 
accomplished; 1 know techniques have 
improved over the years, but 1 thought 
there was still an uncertainty of four or 
five percent in most of the radioactive 
dating methods. I admit I’m hedging; I 
don’t like to call a professional categori- 
cally wrong, but still 1 have my doubts 
about this one. 

But don’t let that bother you; if the 
question is important to you, you can 
always check it. If you want to write hard- 
science space opera, or be able to spot the 
wilder nonsense in a modern black hole 
discussion, get the book. 




THE GOLDEN MAN 

by Philip K. Dick 
edited by Mark Hurst 
Berkley. $2.25 

Reviewed by Alan Ryan 

NLY RARELY DOES A BOOK 
honor its readers. This one 
does. 

The Golden Man by Philip K. 
Dick contains fifteen previously uncol- 
lected stories that were published 
originally in a variety of magazines be- 
tween 1953 and 1974. What we have here 
is a representative selection of work, 
written over a span of more than twenty 



years, framed between an astonishingly 
personal and revealing introduction and a 
set of retrospective story notes that, by 
turns, explain, puzzle, question, apolo- 
gize, plead. The result is a book that will 
have to be regarded as a major text in the 
literature of science fiction and the illu- 
minating personal document of a major 
writer. 

Dick’s stories and novels have, from 
the very beginning, made an equal 
appeal to both intellect and imagination. 
His mind ranges so widely and deeply 
that comparisons to writers as diverse as 
Samuel Beckett and Tom Stoppard are 
not out of order. The stories included 
here are ample evidence and this would 
be an important book if it contained no- 
thing more. And what kind of stories are 
they? Are they any fun? Well, there’s a 
story in which a crazed pinball machine 
starts scoring on its players. And a story 
about a flock of bloodthirsty butterflies. 
Then there’s the one about a determined 
robot that comes to your house and won’t 
go away till you buy it. Oh, and the one 
about an alien invasion in which the ali- 
ens come disguised as three-foot high 
real estate salesmen. Then there’s the 
one... Yes, the stories are fun. And, 
through the fun and the wit, they raise 
questions, basic questions, that stretch 
the intellect along with the imagination. 

Even those that are merely interesting 
and workmanlike display the kind of con- 
sistent entertainment value on which 
science fiction magazines thrive: “Med- 
dler,” for example, or “The King of the 
Elves,” or “Small Town.” The fact that 
these stories have gone uncollected 
through the years, however, should not 
suggest that they come from the bottom 
of the barrel. There isn’t a bad or boring 
story in the lot, please understand, and 
even the slightest of them has something 
to recommend it. Dick’s casual stories — 
and he was a prolific writer of magazine 
stories early in his career — are all good 
and intelligent entertainments. “Small 
Town,” for instance, a familiar and 
predictable yarn about a man who 
constructs his own scale-model reality in 
the basement, is painstakingly detailed, 
convincingly told, eerily memorable, and 
raises a constant theme in Dick’s writing, 
the question of reality and how the hell 
will we know it when we find it? 

For this new colllection, Dick has writ- 
ten an introduction that deserves a prize 
of its own for its honesty, its self-revela- 
tion, for the brilliance and strength of its 
prose, and for the glaring light it throws 
on the condition of the serious writer in 
these our times. A few other writers whiz 
through these pages too, for example, 
Norman Spinrad (“Norman has the worst 
temper of any living mortal”) and Harlan 
Ellison (“Harlan hates my guts. .but I 
love that little bastard. He is a person 
who really exists.”) But mostly Dick talks 
about himself. 






Listen: “I’d like to get (God) here 
where I could interrogate him, tell him 
that I think the world is screwed up. that 
man didn’t sin and fall but was pushed — 
which is bad enough — but was then sold 
the lie that he is basically sinful, which 1 
know he is not.” The strength of Dick’s 
anger and frustration is in those last half 
dozen monosyllables. 

Or this: “I want to write about people I 
love, and put them into a fictional world 
spun out of my own mind, not the world 
we actually have, because the world we 
actually have does not meet my stan- 
dards. Okay, so 1 should revise my stan- 
dards; I’m out of step. I should yield to 
reality. 1 have never yielded to reality.” 

Or this: “My writing, in toto, is an 
attempt on my part to take my life and 
everything I’ve seen and done, and fash- 
ion it into a work which makes sense.” 
This is the sound of a writer at the ma- 
turity of his talent, with a large body of 
work behind him, with many of his per- 
sonal gauntlets safely traversed, and 
much of the journey rearranged, fiction- 
alized (most notably in A Scanner Dark- 
ly), refashioned so that, at last, it all 
begins to make sense. 

The same honesty and self-revelation 
run through the notes on the stories, as 
Dick looks back at work done years 
earlier. “The theme of dangerous toys 
runs like a tattered thread throughout my 
writing ... I was at a sort of halfway point 
between doubt and faith. Years later I’m 
still in that position . The theme of cari- 
tas, (or agape) shows up in my writing as 
the key to the authentic human. .1 am 
convinced that anything can be faked ... I 
may be reading too much into this 
simpleminded early story, but... This 
ending is not good. The fans were 
right. .Joanna Russ wrote me the nasti- 
est letter I’ve ever received...! have 
always managed to offend people by what 
1 write. .Sorry, people. .Either I’ve in- 
vented a whole new logic or, ahem. I’m 
not playing with a full deck.” 

These notes tell us a good deal about 
the younger writer who created these 
stories. Even more, they show us the 
writer as he is now, able to comment and 
evaluate and even occasionally smile, 
wan though the smile may be. And there 
is something more as well. Dick has, in 
the past, been noted for his anger, des- 
pair, mistrust: a prince of paranoia. But 
we meet now, in these pages, a man who 
asks us to observe, in the work he 
presents, “a theme of human trust.” He 
asks that we not misread the stories and 
“see dislike and anger only,” because 
the anger “is generated out of love.” His 
anger, he declares simply, rightly, is 
“love baffled.” Here is a writer who, 
perhaps at last feeling himself on safer 
ground, has come out into view to ask for 
a more proper understanding. He de- 
serves it, as well as our respect, for the 
stories, the questions, the honesty, the 



brilliant wedding of conviction and craft. 

The Golden Man will be indispensable 
to anyone interested in tracing the 
evolution of some of Dick’s ideas from 
stories into novels. “The Mold of Yancy” 
(1955), for example, later turned into The 
Penultimate Truth (1964), “The Little 
Black Box” (1964 developed into Do 
Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? 
(1968) — Dick feels the story is more suc- 
cessful than the nove| — and “Return 
Match” (1967) features Officer Joseph 
Tinbane, a central character in Counter- 
Clock World (mi). 

If the book is marred at all, it is only by 
the embarrassingly breathless, if merci- 
fully brief, foreword by the editor, Mark 
Hurst. And, although Dick asks in the 
notes that we read “The Little Black 
Box” last of all the stories, the editor has 
chosen to place it in the middle of the 
book. Well, it’s not a perfect world . 

The Golden Man has already made 
1980 a distinguished year for science 
fiction. And Philip K. Dick is playing with 
a full deck, all right. He just doesn’t have 
the same cards we do. 




THE SPIRIT OF DORSAI 



by Gordon R. Dickson 
Ace Books, S5. 95 

Reviewed by Clifford R. McMurray 

G ordon R. DICKSON is a pro- 
ponent of the theory that the 
progress of the human race is 
made, not in a slow and steady 
upward line, but in quantum jumps. His 
own writing is a strong argument in favor 
of this theory. The first quantum leap of 
improvement came in the early sixties, 
with the publication of Necromancer. 
Another quantum jump was made only a 
few years ago, in The Far Call. That 
second dramatic improvement is now 
bearing its fruit in such work as this vol- 
ume, which contains the first new Dorsai 
story in nearly five years. 

The Spirit of Dorsai is another of the 
heavily illustrated trade paperbacks Ace 
has been experimenting with recently. 
The illustrations are of uneven quality. 



and of such varied style as to lead one to 
suspect that they were done by more than 
a single artist. The name given for the il- 
lustrator, Fernando Fernandez, certainly 
sounds like a pen name. The illustrations 
aside, this is one of the few trade paper- 
backs thus far produced to justify its 
purchase price on the quality and quanti- 
ty of the text. It consists of one novella 
and one novelette, surrounded by stage- 
setting passages from the next Dorsai 
novel, The Final Encyclopedia. The 
stories are what Dickson calls “illumina- 
tions” of the Dorsai series, also called the 
Childe Cycle. They are intended to add 
further depth to the series by exploring 
some aspects of his future history not 
dealt with directly in the main story line. 

These two stories of the Dorsai, the 
people of a world whose principal exi.-ort 
is the services of their men as merce- 
naries in the wars of the other human- 
settled planets, are drawn from incidents 
mentioned in previous novels in the 
series. “Amanda Morgan” is the tale of 
the first — and last — time anyone ever 
attempted to invade Dorsai. 

As explained in Tactics of Mistake, in 
the days when Earth’s colonies were 
young. Cletus Grahame brought his rev- 
olutionary theories of warfare to the 
Dorsai and set them on their road to 
supremacy in their trade. They became so 
effective that the other worlds were no 
longer dependent on Earth to settle their 
disputes. Earth attempted to undo 
everything that the Dorsai had done, by 
drawing all her soldiers offworld into a 
dozen foreign eonflicts, then invading 
their unprotected homeland. All that was 
left to stand against them on Dorsai itself 
were the families of those soldiers — the 
women and children, the sick and 
crippled, the aged. But using Cletus’ 
theories they were able to defeat Earth’s 
best troops. 

This is the story of the defense of 
Foralie, Cletus’ home district, led by a 
ninety-three year old woman (to my 
knowledge, the first time Dickson has 
ever used a woman as the lead character 
in a story). It is a tale of loving sacrifice of 
some so that their people may live in 
freedom. Dickson has seldom written 
more powerfully, and his first real 
attempt at female characterization is a 
complete success. The richness of des- 
cription and multiple layers of meaning 
demonstrate that where Dickson was 
strong before, he is now all but 
unmatchable. 

“Brothers,” previously published in 
The John W. Campbell Memorial Antho- 
logy, shows the old Dickson at his best. It 
completes the story partially told in the 
Hugo Award winner Soldier. Ask Not, of 
the assassination of Kensie Graeme on 
the backwater world of St. Marie, and the 
avenging of his death by his twin brother 
Ian. Dickson has been accused by some of 
[Continued on page 72] 




62 



Michael Kaluta: 
Storytelling Fantasy Artist 

by Floyd Kemske 



W HEN THE MARVEL COMICS 
Group held its big Marvel 
Comic Convention in New 
York, one of the exhibits was 
a display case with an original painting by 
Michael Kaluta. The display, however, 
was designed to show how a cover 
painting might be unsuitable for Marvel 
until the Production Department had 
modified it. The artist found himself 
drawn toward the cabinet holding his 
painting, but in typical Kaluta fashion he 
was more interested in the spectators 
than the display. He could not help 
eavesdropping on the conversation of a 
father and his young son. 

"See,” said the father, “this shows 
what happens when the painting is un- 
suitable. They touch it up and make it 
better.” 

“How is it better?” said the little boy. 
“Well, look,” said the father. “See 
how big the teeth are? And look at the 



blood in there.” The father then walked 
away toward another exhibit. 

The little boy remained at the display 
case for a moment, then finally pointed at 
Kaluta’s original. “You know,” he said, 
“I like that one best.” 

Kaluta smiles when he tells that story. 
"That’s all I needed,” he says. And it 
does seem to be all he needs. He is an 
artist who works to please a little boy 
rather than a production department. The 
anecdote has a larger symbolic value, 
however, because when you talk with him 
you have the feeling that he paints exclu- 
sively for the sake of a little boy, the little 
boy inside him. The one he is telling 
stories to. 

Michael Kaluta is one of the foremost 
practitioners of the new narrative art 
which, already well-known to followers of 
fantasy and science fiction, has gained a 
modest foothold in modern culture. It has 
gone by various names and perhaps the 



most popular is the term New Romantic 
Movement, but this term is shorthand at 
best and there seem to be as many 
artists who resent this term as embrace 
it. “Actually,” Kaluta remarks in his 
cryptic way, “there are very few people 
moving in the New Romantic Movement.” 

Regardless of what it is called, there is 
an artistic style, heavily indebted to the 
narrative requirements of comic books 
and the illustration of fantasy and science 
fiction, which is supporting a growing 
number of young artists. The main 
features of this style are the use of fantasy 
and mythological subjects, bright colors, 
heroic poses, and painstaking attention to 
detail. In addition, the paintings from this 
“school” have a definite narrative quality 
as shameless in its intent to entertain as a 
good science fiction novel. In fact, the 
New Romantic style’s preservation of the 
storytelling values of visual art (in the 
face of the increasing irrelevance of 
“serious” art to the human experience) is 
reminiscent of science fiction itself. 

EMOTIONAL COMPOSITION 

Kaluta’s conversation is a succession of 
colorful and unusual images, peculiarly 
emancipated from constraints of time or 
place. At times he seems to be talking 
about things which have happened. At 
times he actually seems to be reliving 
them, interspersing the events with 



Potter on Books 



THE STUDIO 

by Jeffrey Jones. Michael Kaluta, 

Barry Windsor-Smith, Berni Wrightson 

Dragon's Dream, $14.95 

Galaxy has a very able Review Editor 
and 1 want to let you know at the outset 
that she is not to blame for this column. 
You might have gotten that impression 
since this is a book column and since it 
resembles a review. This column is part 
of Floyd Kemske’s editorial conception 
(that’s his phrase, not mine). He assigns 
books to me after considering, not what 1 
want or even what books ought to be 
reviewed, but what might “support” the 
feature article. 

When Floyd handed me this copy of 
The Studio. 1 pointed out to him that it’s 
an art book and I don’t know anything 
about art. To me, a Campbell’s Soup can 
looks like a soup can; a canvas randomly 
splashed with paint just looks like a mess. 
I’m not qualified to review an art book. I 
know it. You must know it (if you’ve read 
this far). Floyd knows it, too, but he 
insists this editorial conception of his is 
bigger than both of us. 




63 







f. 

- rS. 



Michael Kaluta 



Pages from the 
Sketchbook of 
Michael Kaluta 



Michael Kaluta carries two sketch- 
books with him wherever he goes. He 
uses them to make visual notes, to catch 
interesting poses and angles for future 
reference. Sketchbook drawing is his 
favorite kind of work, as is obvious from 
the exuberance of these penciled pages. 
He consented to part with a few pages 
from the sketchbooks and we have 
reproduced them here and on some of the 
following pages. 



direct quotations and fragments of interior 
monologue. His attempts to describe his 
own working habits, for example: “In 
between coffees or sitting at a bar 
watching somebody. I’ll be sketching 
them, but something will pop into my 
mind, part of a popular song or something. 
The sketch will go down in the sketchbook. 
Then, later on the sketch will come back 
to my memory while I’m doing something 
else. The two things will fit together. I’ll 
say. ‘Well, maybe there’s a picture 
hiding in there.’ And I’ll start keeping it 
in a special place in my head where 1 can 
enjoy it. I’ll look in on it now and then and 
see how it's growing, how it’s changing, 
until it becomes something that affects 
me personally.’’ 

In fact, his life, like his conversation, 
seems to have been such a succession of 
images. While most people develop intel- 
lectual maturity by searching for logical 
relationships and discerning uniformities 
in their environment. Kaluta has grown 
by discovering anomalies in the world 
around him. Born in Guatemala to a 
military family and moving around a lot 
as a child, his memories consist largely of 
small tropical animals, aircraft, scraps of 
childhood lore, and television programs 
about space. 

A childhood dominated by day- 
dreaming gave way to art education at the 
Richmond Professional Institute. He was 
not very enamored of “serious” art. 

He graciously reminded me that the 
editorial conception depends on “Potter 
on Books.” On the other hand, he 
explained, there is a virtual brigade of 
Potters in the Boston telephone book 
alone and if one Potter doesn’t want to 
write the column, perhaps. 

“Well,” I said at that point, “at least I 
can tell the readers what the book is 
like.” 

“That will be sufficient,” said Floyd. 
He talks that way sometimes. 

Well, then. The Studio is a book well 
worth reading, or looking at, or whatever 
combination thereof is appropriate for an 
art book. It is a handsome package, too. It 
measures twelve inches by twelve inches 
and has 159 heavy-stock pages, every one 
in full color. It shows attention to details, 
such as dating all the paintings. This isn’t 
really a book review, however, and I’m 
going to do what 1 want. 1 want to review 
the binding. Some of us read books pretty 
hard and for those of us who do, the 
pages of The Studio become prematurely 
suitable for framing. 

Apart from the binding, however, the 
book is not only good, it is important. 
These four artists are (or were) residents 
of the same New York studio, a base to 
which they all repaired after abandoning 
the comic book industry. As I understand 
it, the publisher originally wanted to do a 
book on each artist, but they are all pretty 
young and they themselves decided that 



which seemed to lack entertainment 
value, but learned the fundamentals of 
composition in spite of himself. In typical 
Kaluta fashion, however, he never 
learned compositon as a set of rules, but a 
an internal response to a design. 
“Emotional composition.” he calls it. 

After school, he went into the comic 
book industry, where he worked on The 
Shadow, House of Mystery, House of 
Secrets, Batman, Detective, Conan, and 
others. He liked drawing stories, but he 



could not quite assimilate the money- 
making ethic of the comic business. In 
fact, his work there was not very econom- 
ical for him because he tended to put 
too much into it. Comic book interiors, 
like commissioned pictures, cost him too 
much time for the return. He tends to 
finish pictures to an extent which is not 
economical because, as he says, “The 
picture commands, not the price.” He 
still does comic book covers from time to 
time. but his work is more 



none of them had a large enough portfolio 
to make a whole book. Somebody had the 
idea of doing them all together. 

The effect is remarkable. The book is 
divided into four sections, one for each 
artist. Their styles are distinctive and 
even I can tell them apart. At the same 
time, however, there is a unity of theme, 
tone, and purpose which is unmistakable. 
Maybe it comes from sharing studio 
space, I don’t know. I don’t know 
anything about art, remember? But each 




artist paints in a way which is representa- 
tional, sympathetic, and dynamic. Each is 
partial to the general theme of individual 
human experience. Each is indebted to 
the heroic style of comic books, although 
some of them have larger outstanding 
balances than others. 

1 suspect they put Jeffrey Jones first in 
this book because of alphabetical order, 
but it was inspired placement all the 
same. His work establishes a sophisti- j. 
cated tone which makes the viewer think ^ 



These four artists 
are (or werej 
residents of the 
same New York 
studio, a base to 
which they all 
repaired after 
abandoning the 
conne book 
ii dustry. 



Michaci Kaliiia 




diverse nowadays: books, posters, record 
jackets, illustrations. “1 haven’t done 
matchbook covers yet,” he quips. 

METROPOLIS 



T he artist is much more 

disciplined than it would seem 
to the casual observer. For the 
past eight years, he has been 
working on an illustrated edition of the 
book Metropolis by Thea Von Harbou, 
the book from which Fritz Lang's famous 
film was takeji. The project, after out- 
living half a dozen deals with different 
publishers and as many freelanced plans, 
seems to be reaching a whole new order 
of certainty with the English publisher. 
Dragon’s Dream. “I have notes and lists 
of things to do,” says Kaluta, “and going 
back eight years one of the recurring 
things is: ‘Get to work on Metropolis.' 
There are a lot of sketches, a lot of layouts, 
and a lot of ideas.” 

His plans for this story call for forty 
paintings, but if you try to discourage him 
with the magnitude of it, he insists much 
of the work is already done. “All of these 
pictures have been building up in my 
mind,” he says. “1 read the book over 
and over again. I have read it so much 
that, when I was in Germany and a guy 
there had the. first edition of it, I could 
follow it. even though I can’t read 
German.” It is part of Kaluta’s approach 



he must be in the presence of a master. 
Economy of line, visible brush strokes, 
and complicated realistic colors are the 
most obvious characteristics. The real 
world is not colored with pigment 
squeezed right out of a tube, and neither 
is a Jeffrey Jones painting. He mixes up 
the paint until he gets the colors right; 
the result is subtle and true to life. Colors 
are not the best part of a Jeffrey Jones 
painting, however. The best part is the 
amount of complicated emotion and 
character you can see in the people he 
paints. The way they stand, the way they 
look, the things they wear, all tell you 
what they are thinking — and what they 
are thinking never fails to be interesting. 
The Blind Narcissus, for example, 
consists entirely of a girl standing up to 
her ankles in a woodland pond, yet it 
conveys a complicated message of 
vulnerability, of introspective longing, of 
vanity, all at the same time. 

Michael Kaluta, on the other hand, 
dazzles you with action and detail. He 
doesn’t paint one person where three 
would do the job and he is unsparing in 
his props: swords, veils, urns, guns, 
flowers, jewelry, and all the parapher- 
nalia necessary to create a complete 
setting. It is a characteristic of Kaluta’s 
work that it is often difficult to tell what 
the people in his paintings are doing. You 
can be sure, however, that they are not 
contemplative types. Bright colors. 



idealized human figures, and activity 
beyond the scope of his freeze-frame 
images are the hallmarks of his work. You 
get the feeling from a Kaluta painting 
that the activity started before you saw 
the picture and it will continue after you 
turn the page. Consider Ayisha. which is 
a portait of sorts and therefore one of his 
more sedate works. It depicts a veiled 
lady with a beckoning look, but there are 
seven other characters in here, as well as 
a welter of tapestries, furniture, and 
oriental artifacts. When you look at it, 
you want to apologize for interrupting her 
in whatever she was doing. 

Barry Windsor-Smith has stayed fairly 
close to the comic book style. He, like 
Kaluta. uses bright colors, but he doesn’t 
seem to mix them as much. His colors 
appear a little flatter, a little closer to 
those which come out of the paint tube 
(and appear in the comic books). More 
than the other artists, he is fond of bloody 
swords and bulging muscles (although 
Kaluta runs a close second in this 
contest). He is steeped in mythological 
lore and his most pedestrian paintings 
have a heroic quality which seems to 
bring the viewer that much closer to the 
world of the gods and demigods. When 
he paints avowedly mythological subjects 
{Pandora, Artemis and Apollo, Fate 
Sowing the Stars), however, he is at his 
best. In these, he combines a Hellenic 
type of idealsim with the colorful crowded 



detail of the Italian Baroque. It works 
pretty well. If you have a mind for 
comparisons, however, you would have to 
say that while Jeffrey Jones tries to turn 
pictures into people, Barry Windsor- 
Smith tries to turn people into pictures. 

Berni Wrightson is unabashedly mani- 
pulative. He wants to tickle your funny 
Ijone or chill your spine, or both. The 
people in his paintings are more like 
caricatures than real people, so you have 
the feeling that it’s all in fun, but there’s 
something about a fence festooned with 
human heads that goes beyond funny. 
His work isn’t all morbid, however, and 
even some of the morbid stuff is comical. 
Taking No Chances, for instance, has four 
men trying to do in a vampire with a 
cross, a wooden stake, a garlic necklace, 
and an axe, under the protection of the 
rising sun. His attention to detail and 
authenticity in pursuit of humor is 
reminiscent of Monty Python films. His 
paintings have a lot of charm, especially 
if you like dinosaurs, axe murders, and 
coat-flapping storms. 

1 have tried to say nice things about 
The Studio. If you want to know why. it is 
because I didn’t have to pretend to like 
the pictures in it; 1 did like them. Unlike 
what happens with a lot of art books for 
me. 1 was able to look at it and feel I was 
being entertained rather than ridiculed. 

All right, Floyd. I did my best. 

— Eugene Potter 



The hard stuff 
is better. 



HARDBACK FICTION 




PAPERBACK NONFICTION 






1 . Beautv, McKinlev 


hb. $ 7.95 


53. Basic Computer Games. Microcomputer Edition, ed. Ahl 


pb,$ 7.50 


2. 2001. Clarke 


hb. $ 7.95 


54. Futuropolis, Sheckley 




pb.$ 7.95 


3. The White Dragon, McCaffrey 


hb, $ 8.95 


55. Confessions of a Crap Artist, Dick 




pb. $ 3.95 


4. ft. Us. and the Others, Churchill 


hb. $ 5.95 


56. Best of Byte i. ed. Ahl 




pb, $11.95 


5. Red Moon. Black Mountain, Chant 


hb.S 7.95 








6. Firejiood, McIntyre 


hb. $10.95 


ART AND ILLUSTRATED BOOKS 






7. Best Short Stories ofJ. G. Ballard 


hb, $12.95 








8. The Crystal Ship, ed. Silverberg 


hb, $ 7.95 


57. Idyll, art: Jones 




pb, $ 5.95 


9. The Two Kingdoms, Saxton 


hb. $ 9.95 


58. The Studio, Jones, etc. 




pb. $14.95 


10. The Book of Skulls, Silverberg 


hb. $ 5.95 


59. Masters of Comic Art, Garrick 




pb. $ 9.95 


1 1 . Dragonsinger, McCaffrev 


hb. $ 8.95 


60. Green Dog Trumpet, Miller 




pb.$ 8.95 


12. Harpist in the Wind. McKillip 


hb. $ 8.95 


61. Empire, Delaney 




pb. $ 9.95 


13. RiddlemasterofHed. McKillip 


hb. $ 8.95 


62. The First Kingdom, Katz 




pb. $ 5.95 


14. The Tritonian Ring, deCamp 


hb, $12.50 


63. More Than Human, Sturgeon 




pb. $ 8.95 


15. Strange Wine, Ellison 


hb, $ 9.95 


64. Illustrated Roger Zelazny 




pb. $ 8.95 


\b.JEM. Pohl 


hb, $10.00 


65. Horns ofEljIand, Vess 




pb, $ 4.95 


17. Always Come Evening, Howard 


hb, $10.00 


66. Endangered Species. Eichenberg 




pb. $14.95 


18. Masters of Solitude, Kaye & Godwin 


hb. $10.00 


67. Frazettal 




pb. $ 8.95 


19. Star Lord, Lawrence 


hb, $ 7.95 


68. Frazetta II 




pb, $ 8.95 


20. Unto Zeor Forever, Lichtenberg 


hb. $ 7.95 


69. Frazetta III 




pb. $ 7.95 


21 . Make Us Happy, Herzog 


hb. $ 8.95 


70. Pictures by Tolkien 




hb. $29.95 


22. Dune. Herbert 


hb. $ 9.95 


71. Dragonworld. Preiss 




pb. $ 7.95 


23. All My Sins Remembered, Haldeman 


hb. S 7.95 


72. The Illustrated Harlan Ellison 




pb, $ 8,95 


24. The Magicians, Gunn 


hb. $ 7.95 








25. Casey Agonistes, McKenna 


hb, $ 5.95 


PULP MAGAZINE REPRINTS 






26. Legends From the End of Time, Moorcock 


hb, $ 7.95 








27. Heir of Sea and Fire, McKillip 


hb. $ 7.95 


73. Secret A gent X 




$ 4.50 


28. Small Shadows Creep, ed. Norton 


hb. $ 7.95 


74. Magic Carpet 




$ 4.50 


29. King Kong, Lovelace <Sc Wallace 


hb. $ 7.95 


75. Mystery Adventure 




$ 4.50 


30. Dragondrums, McCaffrey 


hb, $ 8.95 


76. Spicy Mystery 




$ 4.50 


31 . Marchers of Valhalla. Howard 


hb. $15.00 


77. Strange Tales 




$ 4.50 


32. Dying Inside, Silverberg 


hb. $ 6.95 


78. Kazar 




$ 4.50 


33. Roadside Picnic, Strugatsky 


hb, $ 8.95 


79. Oriental Stories 




$ 4.50 


34. Seademons, Yep 


hb. $ 8.95 


80. O'Leary's Warbirds 




$ 4.50 


35. The Dead Zone, King 


hb. $11.95 








36. Haunting ofTobyJugg, Wheatley 


hb, $ 9.95 


MISCELLANEOUS 






37. The Devil Rides Out, Wheatley 


hb, $ 8.95 


81 . Spirit of Dorsal, Dickson 




pb. $ 5.95 


38. Ka of Gifford Hillary , Wheatley 


hb,$ 6.95 


82. TheSO's, ed. Hendra 




pb. $ 6.95 






83. Land of Froud 




pb. $ 7.95 


PAPERBACK FICTION 




84. Murder Ink, Winn 




pb, $ 7.95 






85. Murderess Ink, Winn 




pb. $ 6.95 


.19. Collected V/ritings of Ambrose Bierce 


pb, $ 7.95 


86. Faeries. Froud 




pb. $ 9.95 


40. Wood Beyond the World, Morris 


pb, $ 5.00 


87. Gnomes. Poortvliet 




pb, $ 9.95 


A\ . Annotated 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea, Verne 


pb,$ 7.95 


88. The Duende History of Shadow Magazine. Murray 


pb. $ 7.95 


42. The Altered I, ed. Harding 


pb, $ 3.95 








43. The Illustrated Dune, Herbert, art: Schoenherr 


pb, $ 7.95 








44. The Best of Astounding, ed. Lewis 


pb. $ 5.95 


• Number Title 


Quantity 


List Price 


45. Home From the Shore. Dickson 


pb, $ 4.95 


m 






46. Conan in the Tower of the Elephant, Howard 


pb. $ 6.95 


f . 






HARDBACK NONFICTION 




% 






47. William Morris, Lindsay 




• 






hb. $14.95 








48. Popeye: The First Fifty Years, Sagendorf 


49. The Inklings, Carpenter 

50. The Makinp of Kins Konp \the oripinaf], Goldner & Turner 


hb. $10.95 
hb. $17.50 









5!. The Individuated Hobbit, O’Neill 
52. The Futurians, Knight 



hb.S8.95 • 

hb. $10.95 . 



BuYiiiimL- 

* Trvxi/M 



Total list price: 
Less 10% discount on orders over SIO: 
Postage costs — 50 cents minimum/25 cents per book: 

Total amount enclosed: 



Order from: AVENUE VICTOR HUGO BOOKSHOP 
339 Newbury Street, Boston MA 02115 



TOWN 
• STATE. 



■ ZIP. 



to his art that he can believe much of the 
work to be done before he has even pre- 
pared the canvas. To Kaluta, the story 
has a high priority and the biggest part of 
the job is in determining how he should 
tell it. 

His affinity fox Metropolis relates to his 
affection for the city of New York. “It’s a 
very Metropolis city,” he says. “In New 
York, there is an undercurrent: 
makemoneymakemoneymakemoney. I 
enjoy it, because it makes New York 
sparkle. You go to Chicago and there’s no 
reason for anybody to be there because 
— oh. I’m sorry. I don’t mean to insult 
anybody. They’ll come to me and say, 
‘The next thing you’re going to mention 
is gangsters.’ But I’ve been in other big 
cities and they don’t have that zzzt. Be- 
cause no one is breathing down their neck 
to make money for no reason other than 
to pay New York. The city demands that 
you pay it as much money as you possibly 
can.” 

If it seems unusual that an artist 
committed more to his art than to his 
paycheck should find such an avaricious 
atmosphere invigorating, it is in keeping 
with the other aspects of Michael Kaluta. 
The image he allows himself to present to 
the world is one of paradox. He is the out- 
standing figure in the new narrative art, 
for example, yet he refuses to be typed. 
“In a movement.” he says, “you have 
leaders and followers and I don’t want to 
be a follower. On the other hand, I don’t 
want anybody to tell me that 1 should do 
thus and so instead of what I’m doing.” 

STYLES AND TITLES 

Kaluta’s style is probably best repre- 
sented by the first painting he did after 
breaking with the comic business. The 
Sacrifice is a complex narrative featuring 
the shapely, barely dressed woman and 
well-muscled barbarian so familiar to 




Projections 

by Robert Stewart 



Galaxy looks at the making of Fritz 
Lang's classic film. Metropolis. 



O ctober, 1924. Film director 
Fritz Lang (1890-1976) was sent 
to the United States by UFA 
(Universum Film AktiengeselT 
schaft) for a month-and-a-half long 
observation of Hollywood production 
techniques. “The first evening, when we 
arrived, we were still enemy aliens so we 
couldn’t leave the ship; it was docked 



somewhere on the west side of New 
York,” Lang told Peter Bogdanovich in 
1965. “I looked into the streets — the 
glaring lights and the tall buildings — and 
there 1 conceived Metropolis.” 

The water lapped at Lang’s ship. In the 
darkness, the metropolis glowed. Forced 
to spend the night in the harbor, Lang, a 
former architectural student (at Vienna’s 



Technical High School) and' the son of 
leading Viennese architect Anton Lang, 
envisioned a Manhattan of the mind, an 
architectural dream of the year 2000, as 
he saw “across from the ship, streets lit 
as if in full daylight by neon lights and 
topping them oversized luminous adver- 
tisements — moving, turning, flashing on 
and off, spiraling — something that was 
completely new and different for a 
European in those days. This impression 
gave me the first thought for a town of the 
future.” 

He passed the idea on to his wife, Thea 
Von Harbou (1888-1954), with whom 
Lang had collaborated on all his films 
since Das Wandernde Bild (1920), and 
she expanded it into the 1926 novel. 
Metropolis. Together they then fashioned 
their screenplay about the clash between 
the dictatorial ruling class of the towering 
urban complex. Metropolis, and the 
countless worker-drones who keep the 



Michael Kaluta 



68 





"I think one of the 
reasons that the 'New 
Romantic Art' came up is 
that the guys at The 
Studio were looking for a 
name to call what we do." 

came up is that the guys at The Studio 
and a number of other people were 
looking for a name to call what we do, 
which is really just commercial art witti 
soul. This art is a personal statement 
which happens to appeal to a large 
audience. In between fine personal art 
and commercial art. it is something 
nobody has been able to name yet. Barry 
Windsor-Smith, for example, refuses to 
be called an illustrator. 1 say I’m an 
illustrator. I like entertaining. I like 
pictures. I like making stories.” Barry 
Windsor-Smith, incidentally, originated 
the name “New Romantic Art” in an 
interview in Ariel magazine. 

The Studio to which Kaluta refers was 
a loft on West Twenty-Sixth Street, in 
which he shared working space with 
Jeffrey Jones, Barry Windsor-Smith, and 
Berni Wrightson. All four of the artists 
had successful careers in the comic 
business which they renounced in favor of 
the more or less unstated goal to launch a 
new era in professinal art. The other 
three had to work hard to persuade 
Kaluta to join them (his first impulse is 
never one to join anything), but the four 
of them are good friends as well as 
colleagues. They finally persuaded him 
into the arrangement by pointing out that 
they had already painted the place. Such 
is the stuff of historical turning points. 

Shortly, however, it became apparent 
that The Studio was something more than 
shared expenses. There was a bond of 



tographer ior I Love Lucy , but during the 
twenties he ranked as one of the two or 
three most innovative and influential 
cameramen in the world. 

For special effects it was decided to use 
the Schufftan Process, invented only two 
years earlier by Eugen Schufftan (later 
Eugene Shuftan, 1893-1977), enabling 
live action to be combined with photo- 
graphic or model backgrounds. Between 
the camera and the rear projection screen 
there was a mirror with part of its 
reflective surface removed to expose 
clear glass. Positioned at an angle, the 
mirror reflected the image of live actors 
on a partially built set off to the side. This 
then bl^ded with the rear projected 
blow-up of the model set. 

Inspired by D.W. Griffith’s /nro/erance 
(1916), Lang choreographed his masses 
of actors in swelling and dissolving 
decorative patterns of movement. Six- 
teen-year-old Brigitte Helm (real name: 



Gisele Eve Schittenheim) was cast in the 
lead roles of Maria/Robot Maria after 
Lang saw her in a student production. 
Cast as the magician-scientist Rotwang 
was Von Harbou’s former husband, 
Rudolf Klein-Rogge. 

Various sculptures were created by 
Walter Schultze-Middendorf, and forced 
perspective model sets, under the art 
direction of Otto Hunte, Erich Kettelhut, 
and Karl Vollbrecht, sprawled over an 
entire stage at UFA. For some scenes 
full-size constructions of ground-level 
sets were combined with the upper 
stories of the model sets. The city was a 
Bauhaus dream, often seen at angles 
recreating Lang’s distant 1924 POV of 
Manhattan from across the harbor. A.E. 
Van Vogt later estimated the population 
of Metropolis “must have been in the 
neighborhood of thirty million.” The 
shots of Metropolis alive with vehicular 
and air traffic involved innumerable 



hidden wires on the model set. Later, 
Hollywood made an effort to imitate and 
outdo this magnificent Metropolis model 
exterior with a $250,000 futuristic model 
of 1980 New York City, built by 
mechanical effects director Ralph Ham- 
meras for Fox’s SF musical comedy Just 
Imagine (1930), a clip of which appeared 
as Killer Kane’s city in Buck Rogers 
(1939). 

By October, 1926, Metropolis was 
complete, running seventeen reels. It 
opened January 10. 1927, at Berlin’s 
largest movie theater, the Ufa-Palast am 
Zoo. When it arrived in the U.S., the film 
was heavily edited (/. e. , butchered) by 
Julian Johnson, playwright Channing 
Pollock (1880-1946), and Edward Adams. 
They reduced it to ten reels for American 
distribution by Paramount Famous Lasky 
Corp. Metropolis opened in the U.S. on 
August 13, 1927, and it is this version, 
running roughly ninety minutes, which 



Return to 
Ring world . 

Now, you can read the from the best science fiction art, all at once, just by 

incredible sequel to Larry writers, plus articles on the ordering the last four issues of 

Niven's RINGWORLD, and get frontiers of science, reviews, GALILEO magazine at the 
eighteen other fantastic stories interviews, and the finest SF bargain price of $6. 




Geraid Feinberg • Connie Willi* • tarry Niven 




MAGAZINE OF SCIENCE «c FICTION 




Here is the first publication of 
the new science fiction 
masterpiece, at less that the 
price of a hardback, fully 
illustrated, plus Joan Vinge's 
novelette, FOOLS GOLD, 
Connie Willis's great DAISY, 
IN THE SUN, MarySchaub's 
COURT OF THE 
TIMESIFTERS, as well as 
articles by Frank Herbert, Poul 
Anderson, Clifford Simak, 
Jerry Pournelle, Timothy 
Ferris, David Riesman,, 

Gerald Feinberg, and Joe 
Haldeman. 

THE RINGWORLD 
ENGINEERS, complete and 
uncut, in four fantastic issues 
of GALILEO magazine, for 
only $6.00. 



Collectors, this is a special 
limited offer. GALILEO back 
issues are selling out, and this 
fantastic serialization of the 
complete novel will not last 
long. Act now! 

I Please send me sets of 

' the complete RINGWORLD 
I ENGINEERS in the four 
. original isses of GALILEO 
I magazine in which it appeared. 

I I enclose to cover the 

cost plus $1 .00 postage for 
I each set. Please rush to: 

I Name: 

I Street: 

' Town: 

I State: Zip: 

I Order from: GALILEO 
I 339 Newbury Sreet 
I Boston, M A 02115 




followers of fantasy art. There is much 
more going on in the painting than the 
follower of fantasy art is used to, however. 
The woman is holding a knife, as if she 
intended to kill the chained barbarian. 
The barbarian is holding the woman, 
having just broken one of the chains. 
There are a couple of other people: one 
seems to be a gnome, one seems to be a 
magician or priest or something. There 
are heads, presumably from previous 
sacrifices, decorating the incredibly 
ornate dungeon in which all this is 
happening. There is an enormous snake 
in the edge of the picture, barely 
noticeable. 

The Sacrifice is dark, yet it is a riot of 
color. It is dominated by a powerful action 
pose, yet exended study seems to reveal 
that the peripheral material is the most 
important part. The painting embodies 
much of the ambiguousness of which 
Kaluta is so fond. 

Perhaps his most famous painting is 
the one called The Fate of Dollies Lost in 
Dreams, which realizes the terrors of 
childhood in the form of a bed flying 
through a darkened sky above a plum- 
meting rag doll. There is a small face 
peering over the side of the bed after the 
falling doll. The painting is surrounded 
by an ornate border which is something of 
an artwork in itself. The viewer sympa- 
thizes with the frightened child, but a 
consideration of the title draws your 
attention to the doll and the realization 
that Kaluta has succeeded in painting 
terror on the face of an inanimate toy. 

It is not unusual for the title of a 
Michael Kaluta painting to play an impor- 
tant part in the success of the work. 
According to Kaluta, titling the pictures 
is much of the fun in painting. “You can 
add so much just by bending things 
around,” he says. “1 was talking with 
Steve Hickman once and he had a 
painting of a woman in a curlycued 

streets lit as if in full 
daylight by neon lights 
and topping them 
oversized luminous 
advertisements — moving, 
turning, flashing on and 
off, spiraling — 

city functioning by laboring in ten-hour 
shifts. 

In the spring of 1925, UFA began 
Metropolis, shooting nearly two million 
feet of negative at a cost of $1,500,000, 
making it their most expensive film. 
Frederick Wynne-Jones, of UFA'S New 
York office, later released these statis- 
tics: 25.000 male extras, 11,000 female 
extras. 750 children, 25 Chinese, and 
3500 pairs of shoes. Salaries during the 
production period of 310 days and sixty 



breastplate with a little animal on her 
shoulder and there was a huge fire-opal 
on the wall nearby. And I said. “Did you 
ever title that picture?’ And he said, ‘I 
call it Princess of Atlantis. ’ So 1 said, 
‘Wait a minute. Why don’t you call it 
Slave of Atlantis?’ He said, ‘Look at the 
look on her face. It’s so commanding.’ I 
said, ‘Yeah, there’s power in having a 
slave with that attitude. Everybody 
expects a princess to be that way.’ I don’t 
know if he’s going to go for it.” 



A word of caution, then, to those who 
think they understand the art of Michael 
Kaluta: Check the title. Chances are, it 
will change the picture entirely. Certainly 
it will enhance the value of the story in it. 

THE STUDIO AND THE 
NE W ROMANTIC ART 

In explanation of the origins of the new 
art, Kaluta says: “1 think that one of the 
reasons that the ‘New Romantic Art’ 




nights totaled 1,600,000 marks, and 
2,000,000 marks were budgeted for the 
costumes designed by Anne Willkomm. 

UFA producer Erich Pommer (1889- 
1966), for Metropolis, replaced the 
Debrie cameras with his first two Mitchell 
cameras, purchased in America, and 
these were put into use by chief 
cinematographer Karl Freund and his 
assistant, Gunther Rittau (1897-1971). 
Freund and Lang experimented with new 
ways to use the camera for dramatic 



emphasis. Lang later recalled, “Once, in 
Metropolis. 1 had to make an explosion. 
So I put the camera on a swing; the 
cameraman had it tied to his chest. And 
we swung it toward the actor who was 
experiencing this blast. He started to fall 
back the moment the camera swung 
toward him, and he pressed himself 
against the wall. Then the camera went 
back into first position, and you had the 
feeling of an explosion.” In his later 
years Karl Freund was the cinema- 



Michael Kaluta 



70 




It is a book of mooning women, oriental opulence, 
axe-wielding barbarians. 



sorts among the four tenants (who kept 
different work schedules, incidentally), 
but it was not something which can be 
easily characterized. “We could see and 
feel it,” says Kaluta, “but we couldn’t 
describe it.” 

If the artists who worked in The Studio 
cannot describe the bond that existed 
among them, an outsider has no hope of 
doing so. The only way to approach an 
understanding of it lies in the book The 
Studio, which was published in late 1979 
by Dragon’s Dream (distributed in the 
U.S. by Big O). Comprising a representa- 
tive sample of the art of Jones, Kaluta, 
Windsor-Smith, and Wrightson, it is a 
book of mooning women, oriental opu- 



lence, axe-wielding barbarians, and 
scenes of graveyard horror. Most of it is 
wildly colorful, all of it is incredibly 
detailed, and sometimes it tends to the 
puckish. All of it has a sort of “meta-illus- 
tration” quality, somehow conveying ^ 
more story than the pictures which are 
usually created to go in books. There are 
definitely four different styles in the 
pages of The Studio, but there is a strong 
unity as well. Leafing through the book 
produces impressions of what The Studio 
must have been like. 

It was attempts to describe The Studio 
which led to its break-up, however. The 
book encouraged Jones, Kaluta, 
Windsor-Smith, and Wrightson to analyze 



The Studio and its influences on their own 
work. The tenuous bond was not equal to 
that kind of analysis, according to Kaluta. 
“We all became introspective,” he says, 
“we became real sensitive, and sparks 
were flying because of it. No one dared 
tell anyone what they thought, because 
they knew that they were thinking really 
heavy about themselves.” 

In a strange irony, the lease for The 
Studio was up when The Studio appeared 
on the stands, and the four artists moved 
to different locations. “Now it’s a studio 
of the mind,” says Kaluta. He adds: 
“What The Studio will become is what- 
ever people thought it was, like a 
picture.” The artist cherishes such “con- 
ceptual art.” He feels much the same 
way about The Studio that he feels about 
his pictures: the viewer is welcome to 
make of it whatever he wants, or 
whatever he can. The artist’s job is to tell 
the story, not to judge it. 

The Studio might be remembered as 
the most comprehensive expression of 
the “New Romantic” art. Regardless of 
any single artist’s willingness to use the 
phrase to describe his work it seems as 
good a term as any to denote a group of 
artists who are bent on self-conciously 
transcending commercialism. Some of 
them are willing to adopt it and Jeffrey 
Jones as well as some others have been 
known to put ‘NRB’ on their paintings to 
signify “New Romantic Brotherhood.” 
Kaluta, like many of his pictures, is 
playful with the people who would label 
him. He laughs when “NRB” comes into 
the conversation and mentions “the 
nerbs” good-naturedly. When pressed, 
he will label himself, albeit playfully. 
“I’m a decadent,” he says, “a New 
Romantic Decadent.” Decadent or Ro- 
manticist, illustrator or storyteller, what- 
ever you call him, Michael Kaluta is the 
fantasy artist to watch. 




continues to be seen in this country 
today. Not seen is an entire character 
(Freder’s mother, Hel, who was loved by 
Rotwang before she turned to John 
Fredersen), the relay race in an Olympic 
stadium, footage of the robot Maria’s 
erotic dance, and the imaginative title 
designs: an upward title crawl empha- 
sizing the descent of the workers; a 
jagged “Moloch” of impressionistic 
letters flying into the frame in disorder 
and blood dripping from the word 
“Babel.” Monthly Film Bulletin editor 
Richard Combs feels the many cuts 
“separated out various elements in the 
plot and stripped the characters’ personal 
stories of their resonance.” Currently, 
there is an on-going effort by the West 
German government to restore footage to 
Metropolis. 

The plot inconsistencies and the 
simplistic, confused social content were 
condemned by many — including Lang 



himself: “I didn’t like it very much 
because it was a picture in which human 
beings were nothing but part of a 
machine. The main thesis was Mrs. Von 
Harbou’s, but I am at least fifty percent 
responsible because I did it. I was not so 
politically minded in those days as I am 
now. You cannot make a social-conscious 
picture in which you say that the 
intermediary between the hand and the 
brain is the heart. 1 mean that’s a fairy 
tale — definitely.” Conan Doyle expres- 
sed enthusiasm, but H.G. Wells called 
Metropolis “quite the silliest film” 
(claiming that it borrowed from his Story 
of Days to Come and The Sleeper 
Wakes). But there was no denying the 
film’s futuristic dream of visual splendor, 
described by Luis Buhel as a “glorious 
symphony of movement, the rhythmic 
progression of wheels, of pistons, of 
hitherto unimagined mechanical shapes.” 
Hitler saw Metropolis in a small town 



and also had a dream of the future: he 
told Goebbels that he wanted Lang to 
direct the official Nazi films. In The 
Testament of Dr. Mabuse (1932), Lang, a 
Jew, had Nazi slogans issuing from the 
mouth of an insane criminal. The film was 
confiscated. Then Lang was ordered to 
Goebbels’ office at the new Ministry of 
Propaganda where Goebbels offered him 
the leadership of the Nazi film industry. 
Lang said “yes” to everything, returned 
home, packed, and — afraid that he was 
being followed — caught a train to Paris 
one minute before it left the station. Erich 
Pommer, the day Hitler took power, left 
UFA to join Lang in Paris. Brigitte Helm, 
after marrying a Jev. was accused of 
“race defilement,” and she, too, fled to 
Paris. The dream was over. 

The nightmare had begun. 



The Martians 
have landed 
in New Jersey. 



It might sound absurd today, but in 1938 it 
drove thousands of people into a panic when 
they thought Orson Welles’ radio production of 
War of the Worlds was an on-the-spot newscast. 
But that’s the power of radio drama, and Galileo 
has recaptured that power with a new series of 
radio shows taken from the pages of today’s 
liveliest science fiction magazine. Return with us 
now to the thrilling days oi ...TOMORROW! 

You can hear these thrilling shows even before 
they reach the radio stations. Galileo magazine 
is offering tape cassettes of the series for direct 
sale. Hear the new golden age of radio when you 
want, as many times as you want, with no 
commercial interruptions. 

Series one includes three shows offered here 
for the first time anywhere. They are actual 
productions, not dramatic readings. Produced 
and performed by The Open Book theater 
company in New York, they are professional 
dramas based on the best science fiction from 
Galileo magazine. 

NOW AVAILABLE: 

•"Due Process” by D.C. Poyer follows the Supreme Court 
trial of a man accused of stealing a sentient computer. But 
who is to say if it was theft or liberation? 

•"Take My Planet — Please" by D.L. Borengasser, in which a 
washed-up comedian is abducted by extraterrestrials. What 
hope is there for an old joke to span the gulf between man and 
alien? 

•"Calling Shapes and Beckoning Shadows” by Eugene 
Potter, the tale of an athlete’s search for himself in a bicycle 
race on the Moon, at four hundred miles per hour. 

Galileo 
Radio Theater 
is on the air 1 




Please send me the cassette(s) checked below. I enclose 
my check or money order for: I 

SERIES ONE ■ 

I I . □ “Due Process”(One hour — 2 sides) • 

$4.95 I 

2. □“Take My Planet — PIease”('/ 2 hr. — side I) "Calling ■ 

■ Shapes and Beckoning Shadows” (‘A hr. — side 2). $4.95 ■ 

3.GSpecial Offer — Bothcassettesfromseriesone;$8.95. | 

I SERIES TWO A VA/LABLE IN MID-SO I 

4.GAdvance subscription: 3 new stories on 2 cassettes. | 
Special Price: $7.95. (stories to be announced.) 

I Enclose $ /. 00 shipping/handling per series order. I 

NAME 

Street: I 

I I 

■ State: Zip: _ 

Send checks to:GALlLEO Magazine, Inc.. 339 Newbury I 
St.. Boston Ma 021 15 * 




classified 



UNPUBLISHED SCIENCE FICTION WRITERS! 
Unique, interesting opportunity to share ideas, 
compare stories, exchange criticism, be entertained 
and get published. Send self addressed stamped 
envelope to:Singer, Hanau High Schooi. APO NY 
09165. 

COMPUTER moderated play-by-mail games. 
DOOMMAZE, fantasy combat in a labyrinth. 
MONEYLENDER, economics and treachery in 
Renaissance Italy. For details send sase. Rick Barr, 
Box 1783. Cave Creek, AZ 85331. 

SPACE AGE LOCK. No keyhole, no combination. 
Uses magnetic technology. $5.95. Send to CWS 
enterprises. Dept. ML. Honolulu. Hawaii %818. 



GREAT SCIENCE FICTION SHOWS from radio’s 
Golden Era. On cassettes, fine sound, moderately 
priced. Bradbury. Asimov. Heinlein. many more. 
Freelist. Rare Radio. Dept. G. Box 117, Sunland. CA 
91040. 

SAVE GAS. SAVE MONEY! Don’t buy gas saving 
gizmos for S. Build-it-yourself for pennies. Complete 
plans, 3 methods. S3. Gray Research. Box 233, 
Los Alamos. NM 87544. 

PUBLISHING INTERNSHIP. Galaxy Magazine is 
looking for local people interested in publishing 
careers. Volunteers are needed for paste-up, copy- 
editing. typesetting, and a multitude of clerical tasks. 
We expect a commitment of at least three months, for 
a minimum of ten hours a week. Write or call Galaxy, 
339 Newbury Street. Boston. MA 021 15. 



AD COPY 



YOUR AD HERE REACHES OVER 40,000 
GALAXY SUBSCRIBERS 



Total No. Words at .25 a word = — Total 

Enclosed 

NAME 

ADDRESS , 

CITY STATE ZIP 

Send coupon and remittance to: Galaxy Classifieds 

339 Newbury Street 
Boston, MA 02115 



REVIEWS 

[Continued from page 61] 
being a warmonger, since so many of his 
tales deal with men of war in a positive 
light. No one who reads this story with 
any understanding can agree with this 
conclusion. The theme here, as in so 
much of his writing, is the responsible 
exercise of power. Ian must actually 
prevent his fellow soldiers from leveling 
the city of Blauvain as a tombstone to his 
brother, their comrade (whom they loved 
far better than Ian). Ian and Kensie are 
two of Dickson’s best loved characters, 
and this tale of their parting is sure to 
stick in your memory. 

The trade paperback edition of this 
book is probably already sold out, be- 
cause Ace made a ridiculously, foolishly 
small print run. The book was due out as 
a regular-sized paperback this spring. In 
the meantime, borrow a copy from a 
friend. 




A LETTER FROM THE CIRCULATION 
DIRECTOR 



We have had a large number of in- 
quiries from people wanting to know 
when their Galaxy subscriptions expire. 
We intend to answer them all, but until 
you get your answer, this explanation 
might be useful to you. 

Just about everything with Galaxy has 
changed and until all our conversions are 
complete, until we get the magazine on to 
a regular publication schedule, we are 
going to have to scrap the time concept 
for subscriptions. We ask you to think of 
your subscription in terms of numbers of 
issues, rather than lengths of time. 

Examine your address label. There 
should be a date on it. Check this date 
against our conversion code below and 
you can tell when your subscription is due 
to lapse. 



If the Date Says. 

Dec 79 

Jan 80 

Feb 80 

March 80 

April 80 

May 80 
June 80 
July 80 
August 80 
Sept 80 
Oct 80 
Nov 80 
Dec 80 



Your Subscription 
Expires With. 

Vol.39, #11 (the 
previous issue) 

Vol. 40, #1 (this 
issue) 

Vol. 40, #1 (this 
issue) 

Vol. 40, #2 (next 
issue) 

Vol. 40, #2 (next 
issue) 

Vol. 40, #3 
Vol. 40, #3 
Vol. 40, #4 
Vol. 40, #4 
Vol. 40, #5 
Vol. 40, #5 
Vol. 40, #6 
Vol. 40, #6 




Skiiin- 







Who knows what evil lurks in the hearts of men? 



<V//. 




V 






HERE’S HOW THE 
SCIENCE RCTION BOOK 
CLUB WORKS. 

Savings start when you join. 
Once your application lor 
membership is accepted, 
you'll receive your choice ol 
any 6 books on this page lor 
only SI (plus shipping and 
handling). II nol delighted, 
return them within 10 days. 
Membership will be cancelled 
and you'll owe nothing. 

You gel 2 selections every 
month at up to 65% oti pub- 
lishers' prices. About every 4 
weeks (1^ times a year), we'll 
send you the Club’s bulletin. 
Things lo Come, describing 
the 2 coming Selections and a 
variety oi Alternate choices. II 
you want both Selections, you 
need do nothing: they’ll be 
shipped automatically. II you 
don't want a Selection, or 
preier an Alternate, or no book 
at all. just fill out the conven- 
ient form always provided, and 
return it to us by the date 
specified. We allow you at 
least 10 days lor making your 
decision. If you don't receive 
the form in time lo respond 
within 10 days and receive an 
unwanted selection, you may 
return it at our expense. 

As a member you need take 
only 4 Selections or Alternates 
during the coming year. You 
may resign any time thereafter 
or remain a member as long 
as you wish. One ot the two 
Selections each month is only 
$2.49. Other Selections are 
slightly higher but always 
much less than hardcover Pub- 
lishers' Editions. A shipping and 
handling charge is added to 
each shipment. Send no money. 
But do send the coupon today. 



% 

COMl STRETCH 
TPUR 

IMAGINATION- 
JQIN THE 
SCIENCE FICTION 
BOOK CLUB! 

8532 The Hugo Winners. Vols. I and II. Isaac Asi* 
mov ed. 23 award-winning stories, 1955 to 1970. 
Pub. ed. $15.45 

6221 The Foundation Trilogy. By Isaac Asimov. 
The ends of the galaxy revert to barbarism. A SF clas- 
sic. Comb, pub ed $20.85 

4697 The Fountains of Paradise. By Arthur C. 
Clarke. Important novel by one of the superstars of 
science fiction. Pub. ed $10.00 

*5207 Titan. By John Varley A spaceship crew finds 
itself in an alien world— ms/de another spaceship. 
Pub. ed. $9.95 

8094 The Black Hole. By Alan Dean Foster, A sci- 
entist risks everything to investigate a black hole. 
Based on the movie. Spec. ed. 

7898 The Merman's Children. By Poul Anderson. 
Half-human children learn the price of survival. Pub. 
ed. $11.95 

'2725 Tripllcity. By Thomas M Disch. Includes 
Echo Round His Bones; The Genocides; The Pup- 
pies of Terra. Spec. ed. 

8128 The 13 Crimes of Science Fiction. Ed by 
Asimov. Greenberg, Waugh, 13 intriguing stories in 
1 spellbinding voi. Pub. ed. $12.50 






7831 Galactic Empires. 
Brian Aldiss. ed. 2-volume 
anthology of 26 stories by 
famous authors Clarke. Asi- 
mov & others. Comb. pub. 
ed. $17.90 

2261 Dragonworld. By 
Byron Preiss and J. Michael 
Reaves. War between 2 civi- 
lizations. andonlya hermits 
journey to the land of drag- 
ons can stop it. Lavishly 
illustrated. Spec, ed 



6197 Riddle of Stars. By Patricia A McKtIlip. In 
one volume. The Riddle-Master of Hed; Heir of Sea 
and Fire: Harpist in the Wind. Comb. pub. ed. 
$24.85 



’7567 The Spinner. By Dons Piserchia. A marooned 
humanoid alien, determined to propagate his spe- 
cies. spins a deadly web around an unsuspecting 
town. Spec. ed. 

8581 The Magazine ot Fantasy & Science Fiction: 
A 30 Year Retrospective. Edward L. Ferman. ed 18 
outstanding stories. Pub. ed $10.00 

7997 Science Fiction of the 50's. Ed. by Martin 
Harry Greenberg and Joseph Olander. 21 of the most 
brilliant stories of the period. Spec. ed. 









fS 






0075 The Chronicles of 
Amber. By Roger Zelazny. 
Two vols. contain: Nine 
Princes in Amber: The 
Guns of Avalon; Sign of the 
Unicorn; The Hand of 
Oberon: The Courts of 
Chaos. Comb pub. ed. 
$30.30 

’7286 Jem. By Frederik 
Pohl. Intrigue and violence 
on an alien planet. By the 
author of Gateway. Pub. 
ed. $10.00 



EXTJ^ 






'7146 A Secret History of Time to Come. By Robie 
Macauley. In a U.S. destroyed by race war. 4-people 
find their destinies linked when 1 man searches for 
the truth about the past. Pub. ed, $9,95 

2667 Watchstar. By Pamela Sargent. A girl's 
ordeal changes her world forever when she meets a 
rare being without telepathic powers. Spec. ed. 

*2709 Mockingbird. By Walter Tevis. One man's 
search for knowledge in the 26th century, where 
reading is forbidden Pub. ed. $10.00 

7971 Han Solo’s Revenge. By Brian Daley. 
Encounter some of the galaxy's deadliest scoundrels. 
Pub. ed. $8.95 

Note: Prices shown are publishers’ edition prices. 



2543 The Oragonfider$| 
of Pern. By Anne McCaf- 
frey. A mammoth volume | 
containing all three novels: i 
Dragonflight; Oragonquest; | 

The White Dragon. Comb. : 
pub. ed. $26.85 

’Explicit scenes and 
language may be offensive to some. 



THE SCIENCE FICTION BOOK CLUB 

Dept. AR-002, Garden City, N.Y. 11530 

Take any 6 for 

with membership 

Please accept me as a member. Send me the 6 books numbered in the boxes below and 
bill me just $1 (plus shipping and handling), i agree to the described Club Plan, will take 
4 more books at regular low Club prices during the coming year, and may resign any 
time thereafter. SF0C offers serious works for mature readers. 



7872 Barlowe’s Guide to 
Extraterrestrials. By Wayrte 
D. Barlowe and Ian Sum- 
mers. Brilliant close-up 
view of 50 famous species 
Fully illustrated in color 
with text. Identical to pub- 
lisher's edition in every 
way. Pub. ed. $14.95 

2303 Three from the 
Legion. By Jack William- 
son. Science fiction in the 
grand tradition danger 
adventure, and heroism as 
invaders from other 
galaxies threaten humanity 
3 novels m 1 vol. Spec, ed 



'7880 Transfigurations. By Michael Bishop. The 
shocking story of an anthropologist who leaves 
humanity to join a race of humanoids Pub. ed 
$10.95 

2717 The Ringworld 
Engineers. By Larry Niven 
Sequel to Ringworld. The 
planetary system is 
doomed — unless the Engi- 
neers' Identities are discov- 
ered, Pub. ed. $9.95 



YOU GET SAVINGS UP TO 65% 



OFF PUBLISHERS' EDITIONS 



WHEN YOU JOIN THE SCIENCE 



3 . 



Mr, 

Ms. 



Address 



Apt. # 



City 



State 



Zip 



If under 18. parent must sign. 

The Science Fiction Book Club offers its own complete hardbound editions sometimes altered m size to l«t 
special presses and save you even more. Members accepted in U.S. A. and Canada only. Offer slightly 
different in Canada. 53-S21 8