ROBERT 

SHECKLEY 

HORACE 

GOLD 

ROBERT 

SILVERBERG 

FREDERIK 

POHL 

JACQUELINE 

LICHTENBERG 

CHUCK 

ROTHMAN 

GREG 

COSTIKYAN 

DAVID 

KYLE 

LAWRENCE 

SCHIMEL 

FORREST J 
ACKERMAN 

ARTHUR 

JEAN 

COX 

J.W. 

DONNELLY 

JEAN MARIE 
STINE 




2 



GALAXY 



X 

Minus 

One 

Presents 

H. L. Gold’s 

The Old Die Rich, 1956; 
At the Post, 1957; 
Project Trojan, 1956, 
adaptation by Ernest Kinoy 




From the producers of 
Radio Showcase 



Also Featuring 

Protection 

1957 

by Robert Sheckley 

The Stars Are The Styx 
1956 

by Theodore Sturgeon 

Wherever You May Be 
1956 

by James E. Gunn 



Cover Art by E. J. Gold 
Original Serigraph 
©1993 hei 



H. L. Gold's X Minus One Collection : Six radio plays from NBC's X Minus One program 
re-recorded by Radio Showcase, and repackaged by The Union Label in deluxe cassette 
case with original serigraph cover by E. J. Gold. $49.00 — product #RT-1010. 
ORDER THESE CLASSIC TAPES TODAY BY CALLING 1-800-869-0658 
Single Cassettes available separately much cheaper without artwork, from Radio Showcase. 




TABLE OF CONTENTS 



3 



JAN/FEB 1994 VOL I ISSUE 1 



Editorial 


By E. J. Gold 


5 


The City of the Dead 


By Robert Sheckley 


6 


That's the Spirit 


By H. L. Gold 


20 


The Nature of the Place 


By Robert Silverberg 


24 


Pythias 


By Frederik Pohl 


26 


Vampire's Fast 


By Jacqueline Lichtenberg 


29 


Perfectly Preserved 


By Chuck Rothman 


34 


What Comes Naturally 


By Greg Costikyan 


35 


Cigarbox 


By David Kyle 


37 


Let Sleeping Sigils Lie 


By Lawrence Schimel 


40 


The Man with Nine Lives 


By Forrest J Ackerman 


44 


Last Appointment 


By Arthur Jean Cox 


45 


Cyberactions 


By J. W. Donnelly 


47 


In the Canal Zone 


By Jean-Marie Stine 


50 




ARTISTS 

Daumier, A1 Durer, E. J. Gold, Frank Goya 
Lin Larsen, George Metzger, Richard Pynson, R. van Rijn, Zoe 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

"Nature of the Place" © 1963 Fantasy and Science Fiction, © 1994 Galaxy Magazine 
"Pythias" © 1955, 1994 Galaxy Magazine 



E. J GOLD, Fiction Editor EDITORIAL STAFF DAVID FRANCO, Publisher 

CLAUDE NEEDFIAM, Science Editor TABATHA JONES, Managing Editor 

H. L. GOLD, Contributing Editor JEAN-MARIE STINE, Contributing Editor 

FORREST J ACKERMAN, Contributing Editor ANN-VICTORIA HOPCROFT, Production Manager 

BARBARA HAYNES, Art Director MORGAN FOX AGENCY, Advertising Director 



GALAXY is published bi-monthly by the Institute for the Development of the Harmonious Human Being, Inc., a California 
not-for-profit corporation. Main Office: 11394 Pleasant Valley Road, Penn Valley, California 95946. Mailing Address: GALAXY 
Magazine, P. O. Box 370, Nevada City, CA 95959. Telephone 916/432-1839, FAX 916/432-1810. SINGLE COPY $2.50. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS: 6 copies/year. U. S. Bulk Rate $18, U S. First Class $22, Canada $28, Great Britain/Europe $30, Pacific Rim 
$32 U S. Dollars Only. © 1994 IDHHB, Inc. All rights, including translations, reserved. ISSN # 000-0000. GALAXY is not 
accepting unsolicited manuscripts at this time. All stories printed in this magazine are fiction and/or satire, and any similarity 
between characters and actual persons is coincidental. All offers set forth in this magazine are subject to change without notice, but 
what isn’t? 



PRINTED INU.S.A. 



4 



GALAXY 






FLAVOR LIST) 



WHITE CHOCOLATE 

Hazelnut 
Key Largo 
Orange Napoleon 
Treasure Island 

♦ White Almond 

♦ Lemon 

MILK CHOCOLATE 

Cafe Mocha 
Raspberry 

♦ Espresso 

♦ Peanut Butter 

♦ Raspberry Cream 

♦ Truffles without alcohol 



SEMISWEET 

151 Rum 

Amaretto 

Gold Rush 

Grand Marnier 

Highlander 

Matterhorn 

Mint 

Zinnabar 
Black Forest 
Dutch Treat 



BITTERSWEET 

Black Tulip 
Cafe Diablo 
♦ Double Dutch 



MAIL ORDER 

CALL TO ORDER YOUR 
TRUFFLES & TORTES TODAY 

1 - 800 - 366-3538 

or (916) 265-3539 

408 Broad St. • Nevada City, CA 95959 



The Truffle Shop 



"Nobody knows the truffles I've seen. 
Chef Willem DeGroot 



Brought Right to Your Home 
featuring the finest 

Chocolate Truffles 



by Chef Willem DeGroot 



Truffle Team invites you to share 
the excitement of tasting the world's 
best chocolate truffles. Made with 
delicious Belgian chocolate, right here 
in our custom kitchens by ChefW illem 
DeGroot, they are shipped to you 
fresh every day. Send a gift assortment 
to your family and friends today — 
and don't forget to send a box to 
yourself! Call today for free brochure . 
1 - 800 - 366-3538 



DEGROOTS PERSONAL 
GIFT SELECTIONS 



#500 - Round Mini Truffle Gift Box (8) $25.00 

#550 - Mini Truffle Gift Collection (16) $39.50 

#575 - Deluxe mini Truffle Collection (18) $42.50 

#901 - Nine Truffle Gift Box $37.50 

#601 - Six Truffle Gift Box $27.50 

#401 - Four Truffle Gift Box $20.50 

#701 -3 Layer Truffle Torte $31.00 

#710 - Chocolate Oblivion Torte $26.00 



Prices include shipping charges 




EDITORIAL 



5 




EDITORIAL 

by E. J. GOLD 

Illustrated by Daumier 



ell, Galaxy is back. And just how, you may 
ask, are we able to start right off with a 
circulation of 10,000 -- that's a readership of 
about 30,000 — ? Fair question, and it 
deserves an answer. 

In a unique marketing strategy, we decided to 
combine our very popular and successful catalog with 
the magazine to synthesize what we call a magalog - 
a literary magazine fleshed out with a direct 
home-marketing outlet. 

We figured that a magalog would allow us to 
recover our operating expenses. Bringing Galaxy back 
from a dead start in this miserable economic and 
literary environment is going to be one whalloping 
task, but we've got an enthusiastic staff of artists and 
writers who are determined to make this dream a 
reality. 

1 suppose you're wondering where all that product 
information I just mentioned might have got to. Well, 
it was supposed to be at the back of the magazine 
portion. Fact is, there were just too many good stories, 
and, well, we're artists and writers, for cryin' out loud! 
We all felt that the magazine looked better with more 
art and stories. Yup, you guessed it. As the magazine 
portion grew, the catalog section shrank down to a 
tiny, tiny teensy-weensy single little ad. You're 
looking at it. 

I made the decision, and I hope I'm right, that 



you'd prefer to see the catalog separated from the 
literary issue. So, holding my breath until I turn blue, 
I'm waiting for the subscriptions to come rolling in, 
and with them, requests for the supporting catalog, the 
thing that makes it possible to actually pay the writers 
for all these great stories. 

You should know that all subscriptions go into a 
special, protected fund. That's your money -- well, 
yours and the post office's. Most of our costs are 
relative to the postage and handling side of publishing. 

You might want to know that we've been in the 
science-fiction publishing business for over a quarter 
of a century, and, through the catalog, we'd like you to 
know about those efforts, too. You might be pleased 
or dismayed to learn that, with your subscription, you 
automatically receive the catalog under separate cover. 

Back when I went to school, we had what was 
called the honor system, and it worked. Everybody did 
their part. Well, we've done ours. We brought Galaxy 
back, as thousands of fans have asked us to do. Now 
it's your turn to do your part, by sending in your 
subscription today. 

~E. J. GOLD 




6 



GALAXY 




THE CITY OF THE DEAD 

by ROBERT SHECKLEY 

Photolllustrations by Gold 



Bob Sheckley and E.J. Gold reconnected about two years ago, when Sirius Science Fiction — an imprint of Gateways Publishing 
— published an Artist's Edition of Bob's Skulking Permit, which E.J. had illustrated. Bob was enthusiastic about the project and felt 
that E.J. 's illustrations were very sensitive to the story. A few Months later, a newspaper called the Evolutionary Rag emerged from the 
ever-broadening publishing ventures of Gateways. Unbeknownst to all but a few, the Evolutionary Rag was a cloaking device for what 
was to become Galaxy Magazine, under E.J. 's editorship. At summer's end, Bob was sent a series of photographs by E.J. of 
BardoTown, a tabletop miniature city which he'd built over the past several years. These sparked a literary outburst in both of them, 
and Bob sent in the beginning part of City of the Dead within weeks. E.J. loved it and responded with more photos. This first 
installment is the beginning of a lifetime project between these two unbelievably creative individuals. May the sparks fly on both the 
dark and light sides of the Great Divide! — MORGAN FOX 



e fly through the streets of the city of the 
dead, a ghost among ghosts, and we turn the 
corners and respect the masses of the 
mildings, even though we could fly right through 
hem. This is a documentary about hell, not a 
•ommentary. The city of the dead, the city of hell, is 
ibstract enough without us worsening the situation by 
lying through walls that are supposed to be solid. 

It is quite wonderful to be able to fly through the 
treets. Most of this city is built of a soft white 
narble, and it is a very classical sort of place. Plenty 
if pillars so that you could almost think you were in 



Athens in about 400 B.C. But the streets are empty, 
there’s no traffic of any sort, the city of the dead is a 
dead sort of place, although people have occasionally 
tried to start some entertainment. 

It stands to reason, what else do the dead have to 
do but entertain themselves? What to do has been a 
problem for hell for a long time. What is death there 
for? What’s it all about? This sort of thing begins to 
bother people once they find themselves dead. The 
first thing they do is check out their situation. OK, I’m 
dead, I’ve got that. So is this supposed to be 
punishment? If so, what for? Is it for my sins? Which 





CITY OF THE DEAD 



7 



sins, specifically? Is atonement permitted? What do I 
have to do to atone? Or is it a question of serving a 
specific sentence? Or is this one forever, and should 
we just relax and take it one day at a time? 

The main question of course is, how long does 
this go on? Most people would even take "Forever" as 
an answer. But that’s not what they tell you, once you 
start asking. On 
the contrary. 

You are led to 
believe from 
the start that 
hell is for a 
period of time, 
after which 
there will be 
something else. 

Maybe this is 
the only way 
they can get 
you to think 
over your life. 

Because you’re 
going to have to 
do something 
about it. Or so 
you think. 

"By the way," I said, "would you like a 
pomegranate seed?" 

I was Hades, a large well-built fellow with black 
hair and a black closely trimmed beard. I was a sort of 
piratical looking fellow, though soft in nature to belie 
my bold looks. My grabbing Persephone the way I did 
was the first thing of its kind I had ever done. Put it 
down to irresistible impulse. There she was, gathering 
flowers in the meadows with her girlfriends, and I was 
riding by in my golden chariot drawn by my four fiery 
black horses, and the next thing I knew she was in my 
arms and there was hell to pay. 

Persephone of course was beautiful. She had long 
light brown hair that reached to her waist. Her nose, 
also, was quite finely drawn. It was one of those 
perfect Greek noses that merge up into the forehead. 

That was then and now was now, six months later, 
and she and I were sitting in the little shaded platform 
on the banks of the Styx, at the place where Charon 
ties up his houseboat. She looked at the two 
pomegranate seeds I was holding out to her, and said, 
"You’re not trying to trick me, are you?" 



"No," I told her, "I’m not a tricky sort of a guy. I 
don’t play games. That’s not how we operate here in 
hell. We’re direct, straightforward, just like I was 
when I kidnapped you in the first place. Do you 
remember that day?" 

"I remember it all too well," Persephone said. "I 
was out in the fields, harvesting with my friends. You 

came riding up in 
your chariot of 
gold drawn by 
four fiery horses. 
You were wear- 
ing black." 

"And I lifted 
you up with one 
arm, first twisting 
my cloak back so 
it would be out of 
the way. I put my 
arm around your 
waist and lifted 
you into my 
chariot." 

"The girls 
just stood by and 
gaped," Perseph- 
one said. "And when Mother found out, she didn’t 
know what to make of it." 

"She knew perfectly well what to make of it," I 
told her. "It had been prophesied long ago that this 
would happen: that I would see you gathering flowers 
with the other nymphs and fall in love with you. And 
it was the first time I ever fell in love. I’m not like the 
other gods, you know, Apollo and Poseidon and all 
that lot. They’re forever falling in love and swearing 
that this time it’s for keeps. And then they’re off again 
next day after the next bit of skirt. But I am the King 
of Death and I only fall in love once." 

"Poor Hades!" Persephone said. "Will you be very 
lonely without me?" 

"I’ll have my memories," I told her. "I’ve had a 
wonderful half year with you. I’ve loved having you 
on the throne beside me. I’ve been so happy that 
you’re my queen in hell." 

"I quite liked being queen of hell," Persephone 
said. "It’s been special. I mean, hell is not like some 
other country. Hell is everything after it’s been used 
up and turned all soft and easy to handle." 

"Hell is the place of appreciation," I told her. "On 





8 



GALAXY 




earth, when you’re living, there’s not enough time to 
really get into things. But here in hell everything can 
take as long as it needs. There’s nothing to fear 
because we’re dead already. But also there’s nothing 
to feel bad about because in some weird way we’re 
still living." 

"The afternoons are so long," Persephone said. "They’re 
like the after- 
noons when I 
was a girl. They 
seemed to just go 
on and on, and 
the sun is 
reluctant to climb 
down the sky. 

But here there is 
no sun. Just a 
faint sepulchral 
glow across the 
marshes that at 
irregular inter- 
vals lightens and 
darkens. But no 
definite sun. I 
miss the sun." 

I nodded. 

"We have light, but no sun. There’s moonlight, though 
and the special light from the torches that light the halls of 
the palace of death." 

"Yes, and they cast long shadows," Persephone 
said. "I used to be afraid of shadows, but in hell there 
isn’t anything to fear." 

"No," I said, "the worst has happened and it’s all 
over. Won’t you try this pomegranate seed?" 

She took one of the pomegranate seeds I was 
offering her and put it on the palm of her narrow white 
hand. "Why do you want me to eat it?" she said. "It’s 
a trick, isn’t it?" 

"Yes," I said, "I can keep no secrets from you. 
It’s a trick." 

"What happens if I eat it?" 

"It means I will still have some claim on you even 
in the land of the living. It means that you will return 
to hell." 

"Return to hell?" Persephone said. "But I was 
planning to return and visit you anyway." 

I shook my head. "You don’t know what you’ll do 
when you get back into the upper world with its light 
and air. Once you’re fully alive again, you’ll forget 



me. And you’ll wonder how you ever came to enjoy 
this gloomy palace with its dark courtyards and the 
river of forgetfulness always running by with the dead 
souls swimming just below its surface and the 
weeping willows murmuring just overhead. You’ll 
think to yourself, ‘He must have bewitched me! No 
one in his right mind goes for a holiday in hell.'" 

She smiled 
and touched my 
hand. "Maybe 
you have be- 
witched me. I'm 
quite content here 
in hell." 

"Then eat the 
pomegranate 
seed, " I told her. 

She did not 
move. Her gaze 
was far away. She 
said after a while, 
"Achilles and 
Helen asked us 
over this evening 
for dinner. You 
must make my 

apologies." 

We freeze on Hades and Persephone, and then we cut 
away from them, leave the river bank, track across green 
rolling meadows with topiary sculpture that makes the 
place look like a funeral home or a French park, and we 
continue to the palace of the dead. From the middle 
distance it looks like a small city. The palace is the 
composite of many palace-shaped buildings. They are all 
crowded together, and some are a dozen levels high. You 
see all sorts of shapes in these buildings made up of many 
other buildings that make up the city of the dead. There are 
domes of all sorts, and spires, and many shapes, both 
curved and cubical. Binding them all together are narrow 
roadways from many different levels. From many of the 
buildings you can walk out a window on an upper floor 
and cross directly, or by a little catwalk, to the next 
building. 

The lighting of the city of the dead is like 
moonlight. Or like late afternoon sunlight in winter as 
seen from behind a bank of clouds. It is not night, it is 
not day. Twilight is the eternal hour in the city of the 
dead. 

There's not a lot to do around here. But if you're 




CITY OF THE DEAD 



9 



bored, you can watch thf> people step out their 
windows and take to the catwalks to cross from one 
part of the city to another. There are wires that 
connect everything to everything else here, and some 
people use them as shortcuts, tiptoeing along the 
highwires to get from place to place. They do this 
clumsily, because few of the dead, just as few of the 
living, have any 
acrobatic abil- 
ity. They use 
the catwalks 
and highwires 
anyway, no one 
fears falling. 

When you fall 
from a catwalk 
in the city of 
the dead, you 
tumble down to 
the ground 
slowly, slowly, 
like a shadow 
falling. If you 
happen to 
bounce off a 
cornice or two, 
or graze yourself on a gargoyle, or catch yourself on a 
sharp projecting bit of roof, it is no matter. You can't 
hurt yourself, you're already dead. You can't feel any 
pain. Pain is forbidden. That is because pleasure is 
forbidden. Or unlikely, almost the same thing. 

Where there is no pleasure, there's no pain. Some 
might think that a good tradeoff. The dead in the 
palace of the dead don't think so. Being unable to hurt 
yourself just makes the boredom that much more 
excruciating. There are people in hell who cut their 
throats every evening. It doesn't do anything. It's just a 
gesture. But gestures are important when you don't 
have anything else, and all you have in hell are 
gestures. Some make gestures of pain, and cut their 
own throats. Others step out the windows and take to 
the catwalks and high wires and go visiting. Is visiting 
a pleasure? Not in hell. It is a gesture. The people of 
hell don't despise gestures. After you're dead, gesture 
is all that's left. 

We zoom through a doorway, segue down a 
corridor, slither through a doorway, do the whole 
thing several times, and then we come to a stop in a 
large room. Achilles is sitting in a lyre-backed 



chair. We know it is him because affixed to his 
back there is a bronze plaque reading AXHIAAEE. 

The matter of easy identification has been found 
necessary in hell, where unnecessary confusion is 
frowned upon. It is more than enough work just to be 
dead, without wondering who the people all around 
you are. This plaque system is for the benefit, not just 

of the inhabitants, 
but for future 
audiences which 
will look at the 
stories of people 
in this place on 
films made by us, 
the people who 
will either go 
back in time to 
record them, or 
build them up as 
imaginative con- 
structs in the 
computer that can 
build anything 
that can be 
imagined. And 
looking just be- 
yond that, we foresee a time when secondary and 
tertiary images will be capable of generation based not 
only on primary sources but also people's different 
versions of those primary sources; and while this 
might not strictly be the only kind of 
imagination — the jury's out on that one — it certainly is 
one of the possible sorts, a sort of synthesis manque so 
the least we can do is keep everyone easily 
identifiable. 

Back in the real world, of course, people are rarely 
found just sitting in a chair, not reading, not watching 
tv, not even thinking. But these are not realistic stories 
in that the sort of detail one would like — the incomes 
of the protagonists, their main loves and hates, their 
family tree for three generations, is unfortunately 
missing. But Achilles does in fact happen to be just 
sitting as we turn our attention to him. He spends a lot 
of time doing this. The problem of doing nothing is 
one of the greatest problems in hell, one which people 
have put a lot of attention into but not solved yet. 
Achilles certainly has not solved it. He is just sitting 
in his chair, staring into the middle distance. 

Helen of Troy enters from the right. 





10 



GALAXY 



It's a mistake to try to describe or even photograph 
the features of someone as famous, as numinous, as 
Helen of Troy, because her features exist mostly in 
dreams, where they are made up of the images 
generated by all the men who have ever dreamed of 
her, or at least a significant cross-section thereof, 
because the computer only needs a cross-section of 
data, not all of 
it. Since we 
don't use the 
dreams of every 
one who ever 
dreamed of Hel- 
en, her repro- 
duced image is 
a little blurred 
around the nose, 
though I think 
we captured her 
general shape 
quite nicely. 

Suffice it to 
say, she's a 
good looking 
dame of every- 
one's predilec- 
tion and she wears her bronze plaque with distinction, 
so you think, looking at her, she walks like she's 
Helen of Troy, and that of course is who she is. She 
wears a simple frock made up of silken ambiguities, 
and around her head is a golden lie. 

"Hello, Achilles," she says. "I'm just back from 
the marketplace. Boy, have / got a story to tell you." 

Achilles had been staring off into the middle 
distance, paying no attention to his wife, Helen of Troy. 
But on hearing her words, he turned his head. 

"How could you hear anything? There's never any 
news around here. What could ever happen in 
hell? Just people's opinions, that's all you get in hell. 
So what could you have heard in the marketplace? I 
suppose the philosophers have figured out another 
proof for the possibility or the impossibility of this 
place existing? Frankly, I couldn't care less. It's a 
matter of minor importance, whether this place exists 
or not. But even if they have a proof about it one way 
or the other, it is still hardly news." 

"Do stop making speeches," Helen said "It isn't 
your turn. Despite your hypothesizing, I do happen to 
have real and incontestable news of a timely and 



late-breaking nature. That gives me the right, not only 
to speak, but also to embroider images and use words 
in strange and unlikely ways. For it is well known that 
matters must never be spoken of directly, and that one 
must not take refuge in the subterfuge which the 
Heisenbergian position forces on us." 

"If you got some news," Achilles said brutally, 

"what is it?" 

"That ap- 
proach is much 
too simple, my 
darling," Helen 
said. "Once the 
bearer of news 
has discharged 
her novelty, it is 
all over, she has 
no more news to 
impart, she is 
forced to return 
to her original 
rather static posi- 
tion, Unappre- 
ciated Love Ob- 
ject. Me. Can 
you fancy that? 
No, don't be too quick, my friend, I need to get some 
value out of the fact that I might even carry news, 
without being forced prematurely to divulge it." 

"You run a fine line," Achilles said, "since what you 
mean is that you carry the imputation that you carry news, 
rather than the news itself. And an imputation is of much 
less value than the fact it imputes toward." 

"What I have heard is weighty enough," Helen 
said, "for me to interrupt you and to tell you that what 
I have to tell is even now taking place, but out of your 
sight, my dear Achilles. Now, wouldn't you like to 
know what is happening?" 

The scene froze. The camera or whatever it was 
dissolved into a light show. This was pleasurable in 
its own right, and mildly hypnotic as well. The dead 
have found that everything goes better when you're 
mildly hypnotized. In fact, there are some who say 
that death itself is but a state of mild hypnosis, or, to 
be more specific, that there is no such thing as death, 
since what we call death is merely a pathological 
hypnotic state from which we cannot waken. 

Be that as it may, the camera was powered 
through a cable that trailed out through the window, 





CITY OF THE DEAD 



11 



from which it hung in a great catenary loop so that, 
considering it as a roadway, we could travel along the 
curve, and see, at the top, a little house, under which 
the stream that is the cable flows. In the several rooms 
of this house above the torrent, there are various 
activities going on. We make a choice, go through the 
nearest door, and we see that we are in some sort of a 
control room. 

There's a man 
sitting there. 

Hello, it's me! I 
look closer to 
see what I am 
doing. 

I see that I 
am engaged in 
some extra- 
ordinary work 
involving sym- 
bols and dials 
and buttons. By 
manipulating 
the controls, I 
can put together 
all the inputs 
from all of the 
selves who are signaling to me through the many 
threads that connect this place to everywhere else. It 
forms a beautiful tapestry. Or would if I could ever get 
it all together. Actually, I don't quite have it down yet. 
Or, even more likely, 1 have no idea what to do with it 
after I get it all together. Assuming I ever do. 

I decide that I'll return to this place at some other 
time. There's a lot of stuff here that interests me. Not 
necessarily you, the audience for whom I'm spinning 
this tale. Why should you care what happens to me? 
But maybe you do, since this is likely your problem 
too, since everybody is everybody else. But it is time 
to return to Achilles and Helen. 

"I'll hold it back no longer," Helen said. "For the 
sake of the story, I'll put aside the byways of 
statement and tell it to you forthright. The fact is, 
Achilles, someone is leaving Hell today." 

Achilles was stunned, but not by Helen's 
statement. In fact he barely registered Helen's 
statement, astounding though it was. Another 
realization had come to him, and its even more 
monstrous implications had flooded his mind and was 
presently using up all referential emotion. The fact of 



the matter was, Achilles suddenly saw that he was a 
provisional figure, and it really blew him out. Achilles 
had always considered himself immortal, without even 
thinking too much about it, and to realize now, on the 
basis of one tightly packed fragment of information 
that had come careening out of the god knows where 
and impacted in his mind, to realize that the collection 

of circumstances 
that brought him 
to life today in 
the mind of the 
computer might 
not come to pass 
again soon, or 
perhaps even 
ever, well, it was 
really a little 
much. 

Provisional! 

It was an as- 
tounding thought, 
and Achilles 
forced himself to 
contemplate it 
without shrink- 
ing. Provisional 
meant that he was a manipulable concept in someone 
else's mind, and it meant that he wasn't even important 
enough to that mind to ensure securing him for 
another appearance at a later date. Because the 
indications were clear, this entity who was doing this 
dreaming was about to shut down, go off line, take 
itself out of circuit, shift its attention-energy 
elsewhere, attend to something else. While that was 
going on, Achilles would be literally nowhere until he 
was brought back into this mind again. And when was 
that likely to happen? Perhaps never. Because Achilles 
realized (and it was a hell of a thing to become aware 
of) that he was as likely as not never to be thought of 
again, and certainly not in this context, unless he 
could do something, make some sort of impression on 
the entity dreaming him so that the entity, after taking 
care of his own unimaginable concerns, would call 
him up again rather than some other character. Some 
quick research convinced Achilles that this was the 
first time the computer had ever conjured him up, and 
the whole damned construct was likely to crumble 
into dream-dust unless the computer did the hard work 
necessary to give the damn thing some zing so that he 







12 



GALAXY 



would call the city of the dead back into existence on 
subsequent occasions. 

But how likely was that? Achilles ground his teeth 
in frustration. He was going to have to try to bribe the 
computer. What present could he make to bribe the 
Computer-dreamer who was the one who had 
synthesized all the available views of Achilles that 
Achilles was 
now cognating? 

How could he 
convince him, 
the errant and 
light-minded 
dreamer, that 
he, Achilles, 
was worth com- 
ing back for? 

"I'll put it to 
you as directly 
as I can," 

Achilles said. 

"I'm trying out 
for Voice. I'm 
not asking for 
an exclusive. I 
want to be a 
Viewpoint. And I know you're looking for one. I'm 
also trying to sell mood. I'm trying to talk you into 
making the City of the Dead a regular stop on your 
mental itinerary. I know you've been looking for a 
place like this." 

The computer did not answer. 

Theseus said in a soothing voice, "I know what 
you're scared of. That you'll make this commitment 
and then find out that this concept is not interesting. 
That it will not solve, all by itself, the problems of 
creativity and recombination and energy. That's it, 
isn't it? I hail your caution, applaud your uncertainty. 
That will make it all the stronger when you choose the 
right one, this one. Helen, why don't you say a few 
words?" 

Helen smiled into the camera, and said, in low 
thrilling tones, "I think we can accommodate you very 
nicely. We're stage people, you see, Achilles and I, 
and we perform best when we're set into motion. 
We're not your tight-lipped modem people. If it's 
words you want, we have a lot of them for you. Daring 
words, lying words, but not boring words. Let us 
entertain you with the story of your life." 




Achilles touched her shoulder. "Well said, Helen." And 
now he turns his face directly to us. We blink, unsure what 
to do, staring into the blinding beauty of Achilles' face. 
Because this Achilles is the Achilles of infinite thought 
over the possibility of great deeds in the world. Achilles 
also represents the hopelessness of falling in love with the 
wrong woman. Looking at him we realize, through a swift 

glance at the 
sidebar, that 

Briseis, the love of 
his life, isn't even 
represented in this 
story, her where- 
abouts are un- 
known, and Achil- 
les has been paired 
with Helen for 
purely symbolic 
reasons, two 
troupers acting out 
a part. "We've done 
what we could," 
Achilles said. 
"Now tell me what 
you learned in the 
marketplace." 

"Hades, King of Hell, has gone out of the city and 
across the little streams that surround Hell. He has 
gone to the near shore of the Styx, where there is a 
meadow suitable for a picnic. But he does not picnic 
there, Hades, though he has caused a feast to be laid 
for his guest, Persephone." 

"Persephone? Hades walks with Persephone, the 
Queen?" 

"Of course. Who else would he walk with? You 
know how besotted he is of her." 

"That's because she's living," Achilles said. 
"People are much more attractive when they're living. 
But she is a lovely woman in her own regard, and of 
course a first-class nature myth of considerable 
antiquity. Being a very old myth gives a girl a certain 
panache, don't you think?" 

"Of course I do," Helen said. "You think being 
Helen of Troy is jello? Nobody knows about 
Persephone any more. But everybody knows Helen." 

"I know you're wonderful," Achilles said 
soothingly, because he didn't want to get her started. 
He wanted to hear her news, wanted to know what 
was going on with Hades, however, because Hades' 








CITY OF THE DEAD 



13 



condition was of importance to Achilles because he 
figured if he could put some pressure on Hades there 
might be a way to get out of this place. Because Achi- 
lles had by no means accustomed himself to being 
dead. At least not all of the time. 

So if you are Achilles you attend to reality, even if 
reality is just being dead. But what you want is this 
nice interior 
place protect- 
ed from bill 
collectors, 
jealous lovers, 
bailiffs, law- 
yers, wives 
and ex-wives, 
husbands and 
children in all 
degrees of 
alienation, and 
all the rest of 
the people 
who live out 
there, just 
outside your 
head, in a 
world of their 
own. They’re a little much, aren't they, other people? 
That's why you like to come here, to the City of the 
Dead. That's why we're trying to convince you, or 
rather, demonstrate to you, that our City of the Dead is 
one hell of a good construct and is worthy of your 
most careful attention. We'll come back to this from 
time to time. 

The important thing to remember is this: we are 
the party of freedom. 

We cut back to Hades. Me. 

Persephone was saying, "When Achilles hears 
about this, he'll go crazy. He wants like crazy to get 
out of hell." 

"Achilles thinks he had a lot more fun when he 
was alive than was actually the case. He makes too 
much over living." 

"Tell me the truth," Persephone asked me. "Is 
being alive really that good?" 

I shrugged. "Achilles thinks so. But that's just one 
dead man's opinion." 

Persephone and I were sitting together beside a 
black poplar and close to an enormous weeping 
willow, its branches trailing in the black waters of 



Lethe which flowed silently past us with a slight 
gurgle, like a dead man's gasp. You could see low 
gray shapes across on the far shore but it was not 
possible to make out what they were. 1 was strangely 
happy. Being with Persephone always brought up that 
mood in me. They made hell seem brighter. Although 
gray clouds forever overhung this place, they seemed 

majestical and 
inspiring today 
rather than omin- 
ous and sad. I was 
happy in hell. 
Which was lucky 
because I was 
king. Or, I should 
say I was almost 
happy and I was 
virtual king. 

I looked at 
Persephone's 
hands. The one 
that held the 
pomegranate seed 
was on the other 
side, away from 
me. I couldn't see 
if she had taken the seed or not. I supposed not. It 
seemed almost as if she had forgotten about it. But 
how could she have forgotten? The weight of all that 
stagecraft pressed on my soul. I knew something was 
about to happen. 

Then, very faintly from the direction of the palace, 
I heard a jingling sound. Persephone heard it too. She 
said, "That's the little bells on Demeter's harness. It's 
the harness she put on the bullocks that draw her cart. 
She is coming for me, as we agreed." 

"Yes," I said. For I had been forced to agree to 
Persephone's returning to the upper world. The weird 
old ladies who make up what you could call the 
Supreme Court of Hell had handed down a restraining 
order on me. Cease and desist. Give the wench up. I 
had briefly contemplated revolt. But then wised up. I 
didn't stand a chance against the living. Not even if all 
the dead fought for me, which was far from sure. 
Trouble is, the dead don't fight worth shit. Dying 
seems to take something out of a man. It would be 
slaughter. There's nothing the living like better than 
killing the dead. They consider us evil. A case of 
projection if I ever saw one. But impossible to fight 





14 



GALAXY 



against. 

And anyhow, I was in the wrong, snatching her 
off the face of the earth like I'd done was against the 
rule. I was in the wrong. And being in the wrong 
weakened my case. 

The way it was originally set up, when Zeus, 
Poseidon and I divided all creation between us after 
we succeeded 
in killing old 
Cronus, our 
rules were very 
simple and 
clear. Each to 
be supreme lord 
of his own 
realm, and no 
poaching on the 
terrain of any of 
the others. 

These rules 
were not always 
followed in full. 

But potentially, 
if anyone had a 
complaint, this 
was the rule 
they referred back to. I knew that but I took her 
anyhow. I took her because I wanted her. But my 
desire had no standing in the law. And even though 
Persephone was the most important thing in my life, 
such as it was, because I think you understand now 
that the life even of a king of hell is not to be 
compared to that of the most miserable living human 
being, or so the philosophers say, I was bound by the 
rule of law concerning cosmic property and all that 
relates to it, unfair and arbitrary though that rule might 
be. But you simply must have the rule. Your life is 
nothing without rules, and not even death is anything 
much without its rules. 

"The seed," I said. "What about the seed?" 

She opened both her hands. They were empty. 
"Oh," she said. "I must have dropped it." And yet 
there was a lightness in her voice. Nothing very 
playful ever happens in hell so I didn't really know 
how to react to it. 

"Don't tease me," I said. "Do you have the seed? 
Or did you drop it? Or did you conceal it and plan to 
take it later?" 

She bent forward and kissed me on the forehead. 



"Of course I'm going to tease you. Teasing, my love, 
is exactly what you need. You're all too gloomy and 
serious here." 

"You've changed all that," I told her. "You've 
brought a lightness and a pleasure to hell that I never 
thought possible. Won't you leave me now with some 
hope that you'll return?" 

"Oh, you'll 
always have that 
hope," she said, 
"no matter what I 
do or say. It's 
certainty that you 
really want, isn't 
it?" 

"I suppose it 
is," I said. "Can't 
I have that? The 
certainty of your 
return for six 
months of every 
year?" 

She shook her 
head but she was 
smiling. "Certain- 
ty is a very 

salient quality of your realm. 

"Everybody knows exactly where they stand, 
which is nowhere. There seems to be nothing quite as 
certain as death. I think that's what Achilles really 
objects to about being here. 

"That's what you dead people have grown very 
accustomed to. 'Maybe death is bad,' you say to 
yourself, but at least it's reliable, at least I can count 
on it." 

"Sure we say that," I said. 

"That's because you're dead," Persephone pointed 
out. "But I'm not. I'm alive. I'm not bound by your 
rules. I'm a creature of the realm of life. Where I come 
from, we have no certainty. Everything changes from 
better to worse, from worse to better. There's always 
hope and there's always despair." 

The sound of the bullock's bells grew louder. And 
then the wagon itself came into sight, decked in 
flowers, drawn by six garlanded heifers. Demeter 
herself was standing in the front looking stern and 
classical, her usual look. She had a little whip in her 
hand made of grapevine. Her hair was blowing free 
and she brandished her whip in the air in salutation 





CITY OF THE DEAD 



15 



when she saw Persephone. 

Demeter is one of those people who are important 
but you don't want to deal with them. They're so 
significant that you don't want to shortchange them, 
but they don't play any part in your story so how much 
characterization do you need? Does a personification 
of Autumn need a mole on her chin? Must we give her 
a dumpy figure, 
and flinty, un- 
relenting eyes? 

Yes, the eyes, 
maybe. But not 
the rest. She 
rides in stand- 
ing up in a 
bullock cart. 

You know what 
kind of woman 
would do that. 

Need we say 
more? 

Persephone 
rose, then she 
bent over and 
kissed me once, 
lightly, on the 
lips. Before I could put my arms around her, she had 
drawn away. She stepped up lightly into Demeter's 
cart. And soon they were gone. 

Hades stood there with a stupid look on his face. 
She was gone. And he had no one to talk to. It looked 
like he was going to have to monologue. 

Suddenly she was back with her cart and her 
disapproving mother and her garlanded bullocks. The 
whole shot. The eternal recurrence! Hades' heart 
leaped. 

"I forgot to remind you about Achilles and 
Helen," she said. "You'll have to cancel our dinner 
with them." 

"You did remind me," I said. 

"I did?" Persephone said. 

"You did," I said. 

"Previously. But I'm glad you came back. 
There was something I was going to ask 
you." 

"I thought you'd never get around to asking me 
anything," Persephone said. "I know you love me, but 
you're entirely too silent and gloomy about it. At least 
you could talk about it a little. Yes, I'll be pleased to 



answer. What do you want to ask?" 

"What I want to ask," I said, "is that I heard that 
you know what is happening to Tantalus these days, 
and I wanted you to tell me." 

"I'll be happy to," Persephone said. "I'll be as 
quick as possible, mother," she called out to the old 
woman in the shawl driving the bullocks, her mother, 

Demeter. Her 
mother nodded 
resignedly. It was 
enough she was 
getting her 

daughter back. 
No sense of- 
fending her by 
interrupting her 
story. 

Pe r se ph one 
said, "I've always 
found Uncle 
Tantalus an in- 
teresting figure. 
You know his 
general circum- 
stances, I as- 
sume." Waist- 
deep in mud in a swamp. Huge rock suspended above 
him on a thin copper wire. The rock never drops, of 
course, but the suspense is nevertheless intense, 
because it was written in by Zeus himself that no one 
should take anything for granted concerning the 
boulder, it could drop at any time, there was no story 
device forestalling it, even though we always pick it 
up at a moment when the boulder is just hanging there 
solid as a rock. There is no way around such a 
situation except by arbitrary rule: You will feel 
anxiety for Tantalus on account of the boulder over 
his head. Do that or we'll strike the Greek Myth set. 

Tantalus is standing there in a muddy little pool 
on the banks of the Styx up to his chin in water. But 
each time he bends over to take a drink, the water 
recedes from him, leaving his face caked with black 
mud and him with the nickname given him by the 
Corybantes, Old Dirty-mouth. No water for Tantalus. 
That's the first rule. 

Next, from branches of the willow tree near which 
he is chained, from drooping branches hang great 
snack foods, whole pastramis, liverwursts, salamis of 
every size, sort and description, cheeses like the world 




GALAXY 





has never seen, composed salads, beautifully cooked 
vegetables suspended in cobwebs, themselves edible. 

But of course, you guessed it, when Tantalus tries to eat 
anything, the thing is pulled out of his hands and is always 
just out of his reach. So he's standing there up to the chin in 
water he can't drink surrounded by foods he can't eat and 
this is Zeus's idea of a really cruel punishment. 

But in hell you 
get used to 
anything and if 
Tantalus couldn't 
drink the water, at 
least he could feel 
it, the feel of 
water lapping 
around his legs. 

They hadn't taken 
that away. 

Couldn't. What 
would be left if 
he couldn't feel 
the water he 
stood in? 

The water 
was really 
feeling good 
this morning. Sometimes that happens even in hell. 
They try to gross you out, but sometimes they slip up. 
This was Tantalus at his best, trying to make the best 
of his lot. Inviting friends over for a banquet even if 
he couldn't eat it himself. 

His guests came from far and wide. From all parts 
of hell. Soon they were all assembled. And then 
Tantalus addressed them. 

"My friends," he said, "you will forgive me if I 
don't get out of the water just now. It's my whim to 
entertain you while standing chin-deep in this rather 
delicious flow." 

The fact was, Tantalus had been in hell so long 
that he had been granted certain privileges. Like the 
right of bathing in any river of hell of his choosing. 
This morning it was the Lethe. Of all the rivers of 
Hell, this was his favorite. The gods had dug mud pits 
on the banks of all the rivers of hell, and planted 
willow trees there to carry the food, and Tantalus 
could stand in any mud-pit he wanted just as long as 
he gave the people who arrange this sort of thing a 
little advance notice so they could set everything up. 

It had taken Tantalus quite a long time to talk 



Hades and the other gods into giving him free access 
to the rivers. "After all," he had pointed out, "I'm not 
trying to mitigate my sentence. It has been clearly 
pointed out that I am indeed doomed to stand until 
eternity with water up to my chin, and that's all very 
well, I accept that. But why shouldn't I have different 
waters and different views?" 

At first no- 
body paid any 
attention to him. 
Then his case 
was finally heard 
by the Judges. 

Rhadamanth- 
us, chief god of 
the judges of the 
dead, had at first 
refused to listen 
to Tantalus' ar- 
gument. "It's not 
traditional," he 
grumbled. 

"No," Tantalus 



replied, 

there's 

against 



"but 
no rule 
it. What 



isn't forbidden is allowed." 

Rhadamanthus, Minos and the other judge hadn't 
been interested in getting into it, certainly not at first. 
It looked like a lot of trouble and they had plenty of 
work on their hands. There was a lot to do back in 
those days. People were always dying and coming 
through from Earth, arriving at the great crossroads 
where the judges of the dead sat, showing up in 
droves, hundreds, thousands, and then millions. There 
was scarcely time to judge the tenth part of them. 
Their stories were in many ways remarkably similar. 

Most of the souls waiting to be judged were clad 
in winding-sheets. Some still had their jaws bound 
with the graveyard bandages. A few had managed to 
bring money with them, and some of them had quite a 
lot of money, because although Charon demanded but 
a single obol, several of the more aristocratic families 
had stuffed several obols, or a shekel or two, or even 
an entire talent of sijver into their mouths. It was 
better than looking cheap. 

It is well-known that Charon, the boatman of the 
dead, demanded payment for ferrying dead souls to 
Hades — one obol, cash on the barrelhead. Since there 



CITY OF THE DEAD 



17 



are no pockets in shrouds, the dead used to carry their 
money down to hell in their mouths. 

The reason for payment to Charon, and the whole 
subject of money in hell, forms an interesting and 
permissible side issue. There is no use for money in 
hell. You only need money for buying and selling, and 
earth's the place for that, not hell. Nothing's for sale in 
hell, and people 
down there get 
into a terrible 
mental condi- 
tion due to 
atrophy of the 
buying gland. 

They say that 
no matter how 
long he lives in 
hell, a mortal 
never gets over 
the memory of 
the convenience 
stores of earth. 

There are none 
in hell, nor are 
there inconven- 
ience stores, 
though it's an interesting idea. So, nothing to buy, but 
form was important. 

Nevertheless, he refused to take people aboard 
except for money. The moneyless dead used to gather 
on the Styx's near shore and complain. It is a terrible 
thing, having to listen to the dead whine. They would 
stand or lie in the mud of the riverbank and cry to 
Charon, asking to be taken across anyhow, for free, 
consider it a public service. Charon would just glare at 
them and say, "No free rides, not even in hell!" 

It became a scandal, the way the penniless dead 
were piling up on the earthside shore. 

Charon was a stickler for form. He charged for the 
sake of form, not for the money. He had no use for 
people's obols. He had a great stack of them that he 
kept in his locker back in Styxville, in the boathouse 
where he brought his houseboat in for repairs from 
time to time and as occasion demanded. For there are 
dangers even to crossing the Styx and if you think 
dead is the last word dangerwise, that just shows you 
haven't seen what can go wrong after you're dead. 

The famous people among the dead had no trouble 
getting across, whether they had money or not. No one 



was going to stop a famous courtesan like Lais of 
Corinth, or Sappho, who was said to be able to 
discourse more cleverly than Socrates. By the time 
Rome became a power, the custom of putting an obol 
in the mouth of the dead had fallen into abeyance, not 
least for the lack of obols that a bankrupt and dis- 
credited Greece no longer sent forth into the world. 

But the old obol - 
in - the - mouth 
construct still 
remained. But 
it didn't matter, 
no one was going 
to keep a Roman 
empress out of 
hell just because 
her tiny white 
teeth were not 
clenched over a 
copper coin. 

It had taken 
Tantalus a while 
to get used to 
visits from Rom- 
an Empresses 
who hadn't even 
been gleams in their daddy's eyes back in his day. 
They came to visit him because he was one of the 
sights, and they asked him questions all respectful-like 
because Tantalus was one of the old ones, one of the 
first settlers, one of the original population of Hell, 
The First Damned, they called themselves, the world's 
first criminals. 

Tantalus had seen a lot of changes going on over 
the years that he had been here. What the hell, he used 
to tell the new recruits who came to him for advice, it 
isn't so bad a place. You can get used to anything. 
Even hell. Maybe even especially hell. Because when 
the worst has befallen you, there really is nothing else 
to fear. 

The camera swung into action again, forefront of 
the shockwave of recognition, speeding down long 
dusty corridors with the reflected light gleaming off 
them, and, in its ingratiating manner, stopped to point 
out that Tantalus had some old friends down here. 
Take Sisyphus, for example, and we cut to a big bald 
old guy with a beard, condemned to carry a 
boulder up the side of a steep mountain, then, when 
he reached the top, roll it back to the bottom again. 




18 



GALAXY 



That was all right as far as it went. Trouble is, no 
one said how long he should keep on doing it. 
Sisyphus continued to roll his boulders down the 
mountainside long after his punishment ought to have 
been over, long past the time when he should have 
been released in his own recognizance. 

But no, they kept Sisyphus working. Sisyphus got a 
lot of wear but he 
didn't wear out 
because human 
spirit is eternal 
and a good thing 
too, it needs all 
the longevity it 
can get. Sisyphus 
used to go 
through a lot of 
boulders. 

Letting boul- 
ders fall back 
down the moun- 
tain was part of 
his job, so he 
can't be accused 
of wanton de- 
struction. Its just 
that no one had thought through the ecological 
consequences. Because when he was on the mountaintop 
he would release the stone and it would roll down the 
mountain, what could be simpler. But they kept on having 
to bring him fresh boulders, and they finally even had to 
change his mountain, because he simply wore it away with 
his boulder-rolling. Sisyphus' boulders cut deeper and 
deeper paths into the mountainside, wearing a scalloped 
path and finally wearing it all away. So the people in 
charge of that sort of thing had to go all over trying to find 
suitable boulders for him to carry up. The boulder couldn't 
be just any slab or rock; it had to be quite round otherwise 
it wouldn't roll all the way back down to the bottom, 
except that sometimes it broke into pieces before it got 
there. And that also took its toll. 

The camera swings into view again and considers 
for our delectation the mechanism of temptation. We 
dolly back to: Tantalus in the nicest way we know 
how. 

We get serious for a moment. We know — what 
need to tell us again? — that the earthly vision 
consisted of fruits and roasted meats and other good 
things dangled from the branches of trees above 



Tantalus' head — tantalizingly — which they jerked 
back out of his reach when he reached for them. So of 
course after a while he didn't reach for them any more. 
But no one thought about that. 

In any event, all that food had to be renewed 
almost daily, just the same as if he had made a meal of 
it. Because you can't tempt a man with a moldy roast 

and a bunch of 
rotten grapes. So 
you could say 
that in order for 
there to be a 
punishment, Tan- 
talus, though he 
never tasted a 
morsel, still went 
through a hell of 
a lot of food. 

And as times 
changed, and new 
certainties came 
and went, the 
style of his meals 
changed, also. 

In the begin- 
ning they tempted 
him with simple fare: oat cakes, radishes and onions, 
and an occasional bit of roasted lamb. When a new 
administration came in, some thinking was done about 
all this. 

"This classical hell of ours," one of the chief 
administrators pointed out at a recent meeting, "is an 
important interstellar tourist attraction. Millions of 
people come here nightly in their dreams. Millions 
more are brought here in one way or another. Even 
alien peoples come to visit us. We are an important 
exhibition, I could almost say a diorama of man's 
spirit. And it is necessary for us to put on a good 
show." 

This became law and there was a great hustle and 
bustle in the halls of the administration of ancient 
halls and monuments. Everything had to be 
refurbished. In Tantalus' case, the whole exhibit was 
to be spruced up and this meant new menus. Cooks 
were trained to prepare the newer more modem meals 
that the menus called for, volunteers were not in 
sufficient supply so some people who were not 
actually cooks by any stretch of the imagination were 
especially condemned to do this work. But after a 




CITY OF THE DEAD 



19 



while the job acquired some panache and the finest 
chefs in the world vied to cook for Tantalus. 

Tantalus found hanging from the branches of his 
tree items that he had never dreamed of before. In 
fact, special guides had to be assigned to explain to 
him what the offerings were, otherwise he wouldn't 
know what he was missing and his punishment would 
lose both effi- 
cacy and sym- 
bolic value. So 
they told him, 

"This is smoked 
boar in aspic, 
and this is 
pears bel He- 
lene , and this is 
a compote of 
rare fruits." 

And so on and 
so on. And they 
waited anx- 
iously to see 
how he res- 
ponded to all 
this, and took 
notes, because 
Tantalus, after all, was the standard by which 
temptation was judged. 

Tantalus quickly got into the spirit of 
connoiseurship that his work required. He knew he 
was an important cultural artifact. It was not small 
potatoes to realize that all temptation was to be judged 
by the effect it had on him. He was like the Smirnoff 
Man of the ancient world. He grew captious and 
difficult to please. With the succession of feasts that 
were put in front of him day after day, he became very 
knowledgeable in the preparation of foods. He didn't 
have to taste to know good from bad. He would 
complain bitterly when he detected by some means 
known only to himself that a spice was missing. "This 
turbot is entirely too peppery. This lamb, too bland by 
half, and adorned with the wrong kind of honey. This 
sauce, it has a bitter taste underneath it." 

The cooks used to grow very angry at Tantalus. 
How, they asked, could he judge the food without 
tasting it? For of course the hellish mechanism made 
sure he never tasted anything. And Tantalus told them 
he did it first of all by the aroma, which he made sure 
to sniff, and secondly by the sheer powers of 



discrimination which had developed in his mind. "For 
look you, gentlemen, actually tasting these foods dulls 
the senses. I wouldn't taste your food if I were able to! 
But what I'm here for is to judge it, and I have to tell 
you that this meal is just not up to snuff." 

And that was the end of Persephone's reply to 
Hades, and she got back into the bullock wagon and 

let Demeter carry 
her back to the 
upper world. No 
eyewitnesses ex- 
ist who can tell us 
what happened to 
the pomegranate 
seed she had had 
in her hand. But it 
is a fact that she 
returned to Hell 
and to her spouse, 
Hades, every fall, 
just as the world 
was turning dark 
and cold. Winter 
with tiny snow 
flakes came and 
went and soon the 
hounds of spring appeared in the upper valleys. I sat 
on my throne in hell and had dinners with Achilles 
and Helen and waited for Persephone to return. What 
was she doing, I wondered. What about that 
pomegranate seed? And just before she came back, at 
the very last possible instant, when I had used up all 
my hope and I had grown tired of thinking about the 
inhabitants of hell, I thought to myself, what I want is 
my Persephone. It's the beginning of winter now, and 
as I sit there on my iron throne, the taste of ashes in 
my mouth, I hear the faint sound of bells. And I know 
it heralds a blessed event, the arrival of my beloved, 
though you can never be sure. 

—ROBERT SHECKLEY 



Continued Next Issue 





20 



GALAXY 

















, :.d * - /Vi'rlri 

Hr v ' *- -ri 



THAT’S THE SPIRIT 

by HORACE L. GOLD 

Illustrated by Goya 



tanding just inside the Pen & Ink Room of the 
Domestic Press Club, I looked from table to 
table until I found the man I’d come to see — 
old Warren Whitman, dean of the loyal opposition to 
whatever party was in power, the news analyst’s news 
analyst. 

White head down, he was staring at the glass in 
his hand as if it were a crystal ball; and his was a 
comer table, away from all the others. He used to 
preside over the big table, not laughing very much but, 
clearly enjoying his deanhood, and now he sat alone, 
unseeing, unhearing, and very probably uncaring. It 
worried and upset the other newspapermen, who made 
me their representative to find out what was wrong, 
not because Whitman and I had ever been any sort of 
friends, but solely because I ran a medical column in 



the local tabloid. 

"Mind if I join you?" I asked twice, without 
getting a reply. Finally I shook his shoulder till he 
looked up, then pointed at the chair and myself. 

"By all means!" he exclaimed and stood up, his 
manners coming back in a rush. He reached up to his 
left ear and did something to it, then sat down when I 
did. "Let me think," he said and was silent for a 
minute or two. "Of course — you’re Dr. Hutton of the 
Morning Mouth." He gave a poor little chuckle. 
"That’s what we on the other newspapers call it," he 
explained. 

I rewarded him with a contents-noted nod, unable 
to work up even a slight smile after hearing it for 
nearly five years. 

Whitman leaned back and studied me."You can’t 






THAT'S THE SPIRIT 



21 



be coming to me as a fellow journalist for we have 
nothing reportorially in common. So you must be here 
as a physician. Correct?" I said yes and he put out his 
left hand, palm up, saying, "Pulse, 79 — same as my 
age — blood pressure, 132 over 80. Anything else?" 

"That’s a bad tick you’ve developed," I said. 

He reached up to his left ear. "No more tick?" he 
said almost jovially. 

"No more tick," I admitted. 

"I keep my hearing aid in off position as much as 
possible," he said, turning it back on. "So would you, 
if you were I." 

"So would I?" I said. "Why?" 

His gaze wandered from mine, then back, with a 
visible effort. "Because I, Warren Whitman, dean of 
commentators, hear voices. No, one voice." 

"And the hearing aid helps you hear it?" I asked. 

"Oh, yes! But I’m being inexcusably rude. Joe!" 
he called out to the waiter. Joe came over to our table. 
"What will you have, Doctor?" "The usual, Joe," I 
said, and waited for Whitman to give his order, 
because he was noted for never taking a hard drink. 

"I’ll have a wet Martini," he said at last. "You 
know, half gin, half vermouth — sweet vermouth." 
Joe’s trained face showed no expression, but mine 
must have, for Whitman explained to me — he was 
always explaining — "The formula of the original 
Martini, doctor, not the mouth-puckering, 
ulcer-provoking modem version." 

He was about to go on with the Martini’s history, 
but I cut him short with, "To get back to the voice and 
the hearing aid — " and I gestured at his ear and spread 
my hand out. He removed the instrument and put it in 
my palm. I made as if to insert it in my ear and 
mouthed, "O.K.?" 

"O.K.," he said, sliding forward eagerly. Please 
do!" 

So I did, and we held our breaths for a long 
moment. "Maybe it’s the wrong ear," I said, shifting it 
to the other one. I took it out, finally, and put it in his 
hand. "Not a thing, " I said. 

"I don’t understand," he said, disappointed. As 
soon as he had the hearing aid inserted, his face, hands 
and body clenched. "Why didn’t you talk while he 
wore it?" he demanded angrily of the air. He listened, 
then turned toward me. "Would you care to know his 
answer?" 

I nodded. 

"He states, 'I was assigned to you, not to this other 



guy.'" 

I sat in silence, wondering what to say or do. It 
isn’t very often that I wish I had a practice, having 
gone straight from interning to my medical column, 
but this was one of those times. A good, solid bedside 
manner was needed and I never had to develop one. 

"Have you checked out the hearing aid?" I asked. 
"It might be picking up a ham radio station." 

"Of course I had it checked. It is picking up 
something far more upsetting than a mere mundane 
ham operator." 

"Such as?" 

He leaned over his arms. "Before I tell you that," 
he said, "I want to know what you think I’ve stood for 
in the half-century that I have been doing what I call 
my job." 

"Suppose you tell me?" I evaded, using the 
psychiatrist’s device of turning questions back on the 
patient. 

"All right, I shall tell you," he said. His famous 
index finger speared me as it had impaled tens of 
thousands of lecture-goers; he used to be very big on 
the circuit, till age slowed him down. "I, sir, am a 
fighting liberal. Not a so-called quote liberal unquote. 
I’ve fought every attack on the Constitution of the 
United States from whatever side it emanated, Left as 
well as Right. I’ve given my long life to defending the 
Republic when it was correct, and chiding it when it 
was wrong, and my chiding, sir, was usually effective. 
As a fighting liberal, I am neither party’s captive. 
Furthermore — " 

"I know, I know," I said. "I read your column 
regularly." 

He took his arms off the table and sank back into 
himself. I felt guilty for stopping him, but I really did 
know what he stood for, just as every one of his 
millions of readers did. Besides, he was getting away 
from the subject. 

"More upsetting than a ham operator," I repeated. 
"Such as?" 

"Such as — such as abolishing labor unions and 
outlawing strikes! I, a founding father of the 
Newspaper Guild, am being told that by a nitwit 
whatever-it-is out of thin air!" 

"Couldn’t it be your subconscious?" I asked. 

"My subconscious be damned!" he cried. "I’ve 
been to every sort of mental specialist there is, and not 
one of them could explain why I hear this imbecilic 
voice when my instrument is on, and not when it is 



22 



GALAXY 



off. Can you account for it?" 

"Not if they couldn’t," I said, loyal as always to 
the profession. 

"Very well," he said belligerently. "I am also 
Being told to impeach the Chief Justice of the 
Supreme Court! Moreover, I — Warren Whitman — 
am being told to break the nuclear test-ban treaty, 
abolish Social Security, repeal Medicare — " 

"Mr. Whitman!" I said, alarmed. "You must get a 
grip on yourself!" 

"Yes, yes, I suppose I must," he said, subsiding. 
"But there is much more — " 

"First a little rest," I ordered, "without talking, and 
a drink." 

He focused with some difficulty on the untouched 
glasses that Joe had brought us somewhere along the 
line. 

I waited till the old crusader had taken a hefty 
swallow, matched by one of my own, then said: 
"Repeal Medicare, you were saying." 

" And repeal the Sixteenth Amendment — that’s 
the income tax — and stop all immigration, turn over 
the TVA to private enterprise, and, of course, invade 
Bosnia-Herzogovina, Haiti and Cuba." 

"Is that it?" I asked. "The whole thing?" 

He waved his age-spotted hand wearily. "You 
know the rest. Repeal fair employment, destroy China 
before she gets too powerful, and the rallying cry, 
'Better Dead Than Red!' Do I have to list them all?" 

"No, no," I said hastily. "I get the picture." 

In a way, it was funny, the dean of commentators 
being fed this line of politics, whether by his hearing 
aid, as he contended, or his subconscious, as I 
believed — and was sure the experts shared my 
conviction. People, including deans of commentators, 
don’t go around hearing voices that aren’t there unless 
they’re sick in the head. 

Everybody contains contradictions of all sorts, 
political or anything else. 

While I had been thinking all that, he had been 
moodily putting away his wet Martini. Now he roused 
himself and said, "Do you know why I have to wear a 
hearing aid despite the fact that my hearing is 
normal?" 

"No, I don’t," I said, humoring him. 

"Because, Dr. Hutton, he wanted me to get a 
hearing aid that he could tune in on — so he filled my 
ears with ectoplasm !" 

I jumped to my feet. "Now that’s too much!" 



He pushed back his chair and stood up. "And do 
you want to know who’s haunting me? I’ll tell you — 
it’s Harold M.N. Jones!" 

"Gotcha!" I exclaimed. "Harold M.N. Jones isn’t 
dead! He’s in a coma, but he’s still alive!" 

"That’s right," said Whitman, sitting down 
slowly, carefully. "He has been in a coma since May 
nineteenth. I had to buy my hearing aid two days later. 
And he has been getting stronger every day." 

"Weaker, you mean." 

"No, stronger. I can almost hear him now without 
my aid. Doesn’t that make sense, if you have been 
forced to believe in ESP — and ghosts?" 

"Not to me, it doesn’t," I said nastily, sitting down 
again. It took a long moment to start feeling ashamed 
of myself for getting angry. Good thing, I thought, me 
not having a practice. I’d probably go around kicking 
babies. 

"A conservative ghost," I said, going along with 
the gag. "Aren’t there any so-called quote liberal 
unquote ghosts?" 

"Certainly there are," he said. "But, according to 
Jones, they congregate exclusively in Washington, 
D.C., the U.N. and other such places, whereas the 
conservative ghosts, he told me, work at the precinct 
level. Very effectively, too, you must agree — the 
conservative vote is growing all the time." 

He signaled to Joe, who brought us refills. 
Whitman finished his drink in two swallows, picked 
up the check and headed for the cashier. "You leave 
the tip," he said over his shoulder. "Then come along 
with me." 

Outside, Whitman steered me toward his 
newspaper’s building. I tried to make conversation, 
but he pulled his hearing aid out of a pocket and 
showed it to me. "Two reasons for not wearing it," he 
said. "One, I need all my breath for walking. Two, I 
don’t want to listen to Jones — he is stronger than 
ever." 

We took the elevator to the editorial offices, 
where he stopped to look at Harold M.N. Jones’s obit, 
which was ready to go to press as soon as he died. 
Whitman seemed to get great pleasure out of reading 
it. Then we went to the wire room and watched the 
teletype machines drum out the latest news from all 
over. 

There was a sudden scream from behind me. I 
whipped around. Whitman was stamping on his 
hearing aid and shrieking: "He’s dead! Jones is dead!" 



THAT'S THE SPIRIT 



23 



Without thinking, I checked my watch. It was 
6:25 P.M. I don’t know why doctors note moments of 
birth and death, but they do. So did I. Then I tried to 
see what I could do for Whitman. He was sitting 
crosslegged on the floor, punching his temples with 
both fists. A crowd of employees had heard his scream 
and come running. I wished I had a black bag and a 
prescription pad, neither of which I had ever needed 
before. 

"I hear him! I hear him!" Whitman was yelling. 
"He's inside my head!" 

"Somebody get the doctor," an authoritative voice 
said. "You, Gross — fast!" 

I let Whitman’s friends and fellow employees take 
over and found myself waiting for the end of the Jones 
story on the teletype. Just as I was feeling like an idiot 
for acting as if I believed Whitman’s fairy tale, the 
item clattered in. All I wanted to know was the time of 
death. There it was — 4:21. I pitied Whitman, but I 
couldn’t help feeling a little triumphant; he was over 
two hours wrong. 

He was shouting, "The ex-President is not a 
Communist agent and fluoridation is not a Communist 
conspiracy!" when the doctor arrived and gave him a 
stiff needle. 

"You must relax," the doctor said emphatically. 
"It’s not good for a man your age to get so excited." 

I restrained the urge to say, "He can’t hear you — 
his ears are filled with ectoplasm!" 

But Whitman did calm down. Tie and belt 
loosened, collar opened, he was a sight, sitting on the 
floor, surrounded by worried people. I didn’t have to 



take it. I went outside. 

I was lighting a cigarette when I noticed a clock 
on the wall and checked my watch. It was four 
minutes fast. So Whitman had gotten the minute 
exactly right. Coincidence, of course. Now what about 
the two-hour difference? 

Bothered, but not very, I went back to the wire 
room and hunted till I found the item on Harold M.N. 
Jones. There was the moment of death, 4:21. And 
there were the three letters I had subliminally noted: 
CST — Central Standard Time — and we were on 
Eastern Daylight Time, two hours later. 

Big deal, I told myself. If I had stayed on top of 
the Jones story as hard as Whitman had, I could have 
gotten the time of death just as right. 

Two men in white, carrying a stretcher, came into 
the wire room. They got Whitman onto the stretcher, 
but he told them to stop while he looked for someone. 

It turned out to be me. 

"Dr. Hutton," he whispered in a drugged but 
forceful way, pulling me down so my ear was next to 
his mouth, "you are the only person I have told about 
my being haunted — and, with any sort of luck, the 
last. I am going to my home in the country, where 
nobody can hear me say, 'Abolish the United 
Nations!"' His voice rose shrilly. "I solemnly declare 
that I shall never write another line!" 

And he never did. Frankly that was just fine by 
me. I’d had enough of him and his so-called "liberal" 
ideas. 

— HORACE L. GOLD 



\ 

By now you're probably asking: 

"WHERE IS THAT GALAXY CATALOG?" 

Did you check under the sofa? 

Is it in the car? 

Did you try the drawer? 

Next to the refrigerator? 

Where did you see it last? 

Did They take it? 



If you still can't find the catalog, just SUBSCRIBE TO GALAXY 
and we'll send you another one. 

Just be more careful next time. 




24 



GALAXY 




THE NATURE OF THE PLACE 



by ROBERT SILVERBERG 

Illustrated by Pynson 



t the age of twenty, Paul Dearborn first 
reached the conviction that he would 
ultimately go to hell. He worried over it, but 
not for very long. 

At the age of forty, the idea of going to hell 
positively appealed to him. Heaven would be so dull, 
after all. 

But by the time he was sixty, he was just a bit 
uneasy again. "It's not that I'm afraid of it," he said one 
night after two beers too many. The shabby little man 
standing next to him at the bar only smiled. "I'm not 
afraid at all," Paul repeated firmly. "Just — uneasy." 

"How can you be so sure you're going there?" the 
little man wanted to know. 

"Oh, I've never doubted it," Paul said. "And I 
don't feel bitter, mind you. I've had a rather pleasant 



life," he said untruthfully, "and I'm prepared to pay the 
price. I've got no complaint coming. Another beer?" 

"Don't mind if I do," the little man said. 

Paul signaled the bartender for refills. "I know 
where I'm heading, all right," he went on. "But the 
damned uncertainty bothers me. If I only knew what 
the place was like — " 

The little man's eyes gleamed. "Faith, man, it's 
hot and smelling of brimstone there, and the sinners 
are roasting in the lake of fire, and right in the heart of 
it all is the old devil himself, up on his throne with his 
horns sharp as swords, and his tail going flick-flick 
like a cat's." 

Paul chuckled patronizingly. "Oh, no, I can't buy 
that. Straight out of 1910 Sunday School lessons. 
Hellfire and brimstone just won't convince me." 





NATURE OF THE PLACE 



25 



The other shrugged. "Well, if you want to be an 
individual — " 

"That's just it," Paul said, smacking the palm of 
his hand against the counter. "Hell's such an individual 
thing." 

His companion lapsed into silence, contemplating 
with bleary eyes the suds at the bottom of his beer 
glass. Paul had another round, then looked at his 
watch, decided it was about time to leave for home. 
He dropped a bill on the counter and sauntered out. I'll 
get what I deserve, he told himself firmly. 

He walked toward the bus stop. It was a chilly 
night, the wind cutting into his bones. He was tired. 
He lived alone, now; his most recent wife was dead, 
his children strangers to him. He had few friends. 
Many enemies. 

As he rounded the comer, he paused, wheezing. 
My heart. Not much time left now. 

He thought back over his sixty years. The 
betrayals, the disappointments, the sins, the 
hangovers. He had some money now, and by some 
standards he was a successful man. But life hadn't 
been any joyride. It had been rocky and fear-tom, 
filled with doubts and headaches, moments of 
complete despair, others of frustrated rage. He 
realized he was more than half glad he was almost at 
the end of his road. Life, he saw now, had really been 



a struggle not worth the bother. Sixty years of torture. 
There was the bus, half a block ahead, and he was 
going to miss it and have to stand in the cold for 
twenty minutes. Not very serious? Yes, but multiply it 
by a million slights and injuries over the 
years — scowling, he began to run toward the corner. 

And stumbled as a cold hand squeezed tight 
around his heart. The sidewalk sprang up to meet him, 
and he knew this was death. For a startled instant he 
fought for control, and then he relaxed as the 
blackness swept down. He felt gratitude that it was 
over at long last — and a twinge of curiosity about 
what was to come. 

After an age, he opened his eyes again and looked 
around. And, in that brief flashing moment before 
Lethe dimmed his eyes, he knew where Hell was, 
knew the nature of the place and to what eternal 
punishment he had been condemned. Paul Dearborn 
wailed, more in despair than in pain, as the doctor's 
hand firmly slapped his rear and breath roared into his 
lungs. 

—ROBERT SILVERBERG 



WE APOLOGIZE... 

The next issue of Galaxy 

galaxy 

will again have too many stories to be able to 
include the catalog we promised 



In order to rectify this situation you can; 

1. Try to VISUALIZE the Official Galaxy Catalog. This 
requires a certain native aptitude. If, after several hours you 
haven't succeeded in producing a workable vision of our 
catalog, we suggest that you try method 2. 

2. SUBSCRIBE TO GALAXY! Easier and more 
effective than visualizing the formless void, subscribing is the 
method of choice. 

WEVE DONE OUR PART 
NOW YOU CAN DO YOURS ! 

AND WE LL SEND THE CATALOG FREE 

CALL 1-800-869-0658 



A'lTEMTIOh 
GALAXY WRITERS: 



Send for ifie portfolio of available illos 
todaq; here s bow it worbs: 

Yon loob llirouah I lit? illos and decide 
wbicb ones set off stories. 

Tben call and reserve ijour selected 
illos. You tben have whatever time period 
is aqreed upon to come up with a storij for 
those illos. 

Then cash the chech. Spend. 
Consume. You bnow the rest.... 






26 



GALAXY 




PYT HIA S 

by FREDERIK POHL 

Illustrated by Daumier 



J am sitting on the edge of what passes for a bed. 
It is made of loosely woven strips of steel, and 
there is no mattress, only an extra blanket of 
thin olive-drab. It isn't comfortable; but of course they 
expect to make me still more uncomfortable. 

They expect to take me out of this precinct jail to 
the District prison and eventually to the death house. 

Sure there will be a trial first, but that is only a 
formality. Not only did they catch me with the 
smoking gun in my hand and Connaught bubbling to 
death through the hole in his throat, but I admitted it. 

I — knowing what I was doing, with, as they say, 
malice aforethought — deliberately shot to death 
Laurence Connaught. 



They execute murderers. So they mean to execute 
me. 

Especially because Laurence Connaught had 
saved my life. 

Well, there are extenuating circumstances. I do 
not think they would convince a jury. 

Connaught and I were close friends for years. We 
lost touch during the war. We met again in 
Washington, a few years after the war was over. We 
had, to some extent, grown apart; he had become a 
man with a mission. He was working very hard on 
something and he did not choose to discuss his work 
and there was nothing else in his life on which to form 
a basis for communication. And — well, I had my 







PYTHIAS 



27 



own life, too. It wasn't scientific research in my case 
— I flunked out of med school, while he went on. I'm 
not ashamed of it; it is nothing to be ashamed of. I 
simply was not able to cope with the messy business 
of carving corpses. I didn't like it, I didn't want to do 
it, and when I was forced to do it, I did it badly. So — 
Ileft. 

Thus I have no string of degrees, but you don't 
need them in order to be a Senate guard. 

Does that sound like a terribly impressive career 
to you? Of course not; but I liked it. The Senators are 
relaxed and friendly when the guards are around, and 
you learn wonderful things about what goes on behind 
the scenes of government. And a Senate guard is in a 
position to do favors — for newspapermen, who find a 
lead to a story useful; for government officials, who 
sometimes base a whole campaign on one careless, 
repeated remark; and for just about anyone who would 
like to be in the visitors' gallery during a hot debate. 

Larry Connaught, for instance. I ran into him on 
the street one day, and we chatted for a moment, and 
he asked if it was possible to get him in to see the 
upcoming foreign relations debate. It was; I called him 
the next day and told him I had arranged for a pass. 
And he was there, watching eagerly with his moist 
little eyes, when the Secretary got up to speak and 
there was that sudden unexpected yell, and the handful 
of Central American fanatics dragged out their 
weapons and began trying to change American policy 
with gunpowder. 

You remember the story, I suppose. There were 
only three of them, two with guns, one with a hand 
grenade. The pistol men managed to wound two 
Senators and a guard. I was right there, talking to 
Connaught. I spotted the little fellow with the hand 
grenade and tackled him. I knocked him down, but the 
grenade went flying, pin pulled, seconds ticking away. 
I lunged for it. Larry Connaught was ahead of me. 

The newspaper stories made heroes out of both of 
us. They said it was miraculous that Larry, who had 
fallen right on top of the grenade, had managed to get 
it away from himself and so placed that when it 
exploded no one was hurt. 

For it did go off — and the flying steel touched 
nobody. The papers mentioned that Larry had been 
knocked unconscious by the blast. He was 
unconscious, all right. 

He didn't come to for six hours and when he woke 
up, he spent the next whole day in a stupor. 

I called on him the next night. He was glad to see 



me. 

"That was a close one, Dick," he said. "Take me 
back to Tarawa." 

I said, "I guess you saved my life, Larry." 

"Nonsense, Dick! I just jumped. Lucky, that's all." 

"The papers said you were terrific. They said you 
moved so fast, nobody could see exactly what 
happened." 

He made a deprecating gesture, but his wet little 
eyes were wary. "Nobody was really watching, I 
suppose." 

"I was watching," I told him flatly. 

He looked at me silently for a moment. 

"I was between you and the grenade," I said. "You 
didn't go past me, over me, or through me. But you 
were on top of the grenade." 

He started to shake his head. 

I said, "Also, Larry, you fell on the grenade. It 
exploded underneath you. I know, because I was 
almost on top of you, and it blew you clear off the 
floor of the gallery. Did you have a bulletproof vest 
on?" 

He cleared his throat. "Well, as a matter of — " 

"Cut it out, Larry! What's the answer?" 

He took off his glasses and rubbed his watery 
eyes. He grumbled, "Don't you read the papers? It 
went off a yard away." 

"Larry," I said gently, "I was there." 

He slumped back in his chair, staring at me. Larry 
Connaught was a small man, but he never looked 
smaller than he did in that big chair, looking at me as 
though I were Mr. Nemesis himself. 

Then he laughed. He surprised me; he sounded 
almost happy. He said, "Well, hell, Dick — I had to 
tell somebody about it sooner or later. Why not you?" 

I can't tell you all of what he said. I'll tell most of 
it — but not the part that matters. 

I'll never tell that part to anybody. 

Larry said, "I should have known you'd 
remember." He smiled at me ruefully, affectionately. 
"Those bull sessions in the cafeterias, eh? Talking all 
night about everything. But you remembered." 

"You claimed that the human mind possessed 
powers of psychokinesis," I said. "You argued that 
just by the mind, without moving a finger or using a 
machine, a man could move his body anywhere 
instantly. You said that nothing was impossible to the 
mind." 

I felt like an absolute fool saying those things; 
they were ridiculous notions. Imagine a man thinking 



28 



GALAXY 



himself from one place to another! But — I had been 
on that gallery. 

I licked my lips and looked to Larry Connaught 
for confirmation. 

"I was all wet," Larry laughed. "Imagine!" 

I suppose I showed surprise, because he patted my 
shoulder. He said, becoming sober, "Sure, Dick, 
you're wrong, but you're right all the same. The mind 
alone can't do anything of the sort — that was just a 
silly kid notion. But," he went on, "but there are — 
well, techniques — linking the mind to physical forces 
— simple physical forces that we all use every day — 
that can do it all. Everything! Everything I ever 
thought of and things I never thought of and things I 
haven't found out yet. 

"Fly across the ocean? In a second, Dick! Wall off 
an exploding bomb? Easily! You saw me do it. Oh, it's 
work. It takes energy — you can't escape natural law. 
That was what knocked me out for a whole day. But 
that was a hard one; it's a lot easier, for instance, to 
make a bullet miss its target. It's even easier to lift the 
cartridge out of the chamber and put it in my pocket, 
so that the bullet can't even be fired. Want the Crown 
Jewels of England? I could get them, Dick!" 

I asked, "Can you see the future?" 

He frowned. "That's silly. This isn't supersti — " 

"How about reading minds?" 

Larry's expression cleared. "Oh, you're 
remembering some of the things I said years ago. No, 
I can't do that either, Dick. Maybe, some day, if I keep 
working at this thing — Well, I can't right now. There 
are things I can do, though, that are just as good." 

"Show me something you can do," I asked. 

He smiled. Larry was enjoying himself; I didn't 
begrudge it to him. He had hugged this to himself for 
years, from the day he found his first clue, through the 
decade of proving and experimenting, almost always 
being wrong, but always getting closer.... He needed to 
talk about it. I think he was really glad that, at last, 
someone had found him out. 

He said, "Show you something? Why, let's see, 
Dick." He looked around the room, then winked. "See 
that window?" 

I looked. It opened with a slither of wood and a 
rumble of sashweights. It closed again. 

"The radio," said Larry. There was a click and his 
little set turned itself on. "Watch it." 

It disappeared and reappeared. 

"It was on top of Mount Everest," Larry said, 
panting a little. 



The plug on the radio's electric cord picked itself 
up and stretched toward the baseboard socket, then 
dropped to the floor again. 

"No," said Larry, and his voice was trembling, 
"I'll show you a hard one. Watch the radio, Dick. I'll 
run it without plugging it in! The electrons 
themselves — " 

He was staring intently at the little set. I saw the 
dial light go on, flicker, and hold steady; the speaker 
began to make scratching noises. I stood up, right 
behind Larry, right over him. 

I used the telephone on the table beside him. I 
caught him right beside the ear and he folded over 
without a murmur. Methodically, I hit him twice 
more, and then I was sure he wouldn't wake up for at 
least an hour. I rolled him over and put the telephone 
back in its cradle. 

I ransacked his apartment. I found it in his desk: 
All his notes. All the information. The secret of how 
to do the things he could do. 

I picked up the telephone and called the 
Washington police. When I heard the siren outside. I 
took out my service revolver and shot him in the 
throat. He was dead before they came in. 

For, you see, I knew Laurence Connaught. We 
were friends. I would have trusted him with my life. 
But this was more than just a life. 

Twenty-three words told how to do the things that 
Laurence Connaught did. Anyone who could read 
could do them. Criminals, traitors, lunatics — the 
formula would work for anyone. 

Laurence Connaught was an honest man and an 
idealist, I think. But what would happen to any man 
when he became God? Suppose you were told 
twenty-three words that would let you reach into any 
bank vault, peer inside any closed room, walk through 
any wall? Suppose pistols could not kill you? 

They say power corrupts; and absolute power 
corrupts absolutely. And there can be no more 
absolute power than the twenty-three words that can 
free a man of any jail or give him anything he wants. 
Larry was my friend. But I killed him in cold blood, 
knowing what I did, because he could not be trusted 
with the secret that could make him king of the world. 

But I can. 

— FREDERIK POHL 



VAMPIRE’S FAST 



29 




^ pt 

VAMPIRE'S FAST 



by JACQUELINE LICHTENBERG 

Illustrated by Zoe 



Ever since I wrote "Through The Moon Gate" for 
Andre Norton's Tales of the Witch World #2, I've 
wondered what Dorian St. James did to deserve 
falling through a gate into the Witch World. This tale 
explores his origins and nature long before that event. 

he charred lump of flesh in his arms had 
been his daughter, or the closest thing to a 
daughter that his kind could know. 

The vampire who, in San Francisco, called 
himself Malory Avnel, or sometimes Dorian St. 
James, gently lay the remains on the soft velvet couch, 
reading the area with all his senses. There were faint 
impressions in the lush rose carpet, mortal footprints. 



A melange of scents lingered in the apartment as did 
faint, indefinable and unnameable traces of psychic 
presence. 

As he knelt beside the blackened corpse, the 
events unrolled in his mind as if he were remembering 
them, though he'd been nowhere near at the time. 

Rita had been sleeping the day away, as their kind 
must. Two large men had broken in. He could almost 
see them. Well groomed. Cologne. Hair spray. Freshly 
dry-cleaned wool suits. Real leather shoes. Guns. 
Garlic. Newly sawn ash stakes. Perhaps even silver 
crosses. 

If he ever encountered them, he'd know them by 
their body Odor. Scrubbing and deodorant couldn't 




30 



GALAXY 



hide it. No two humans smelled alike. Most probably 
these two worked for Don Jose del Rio, the latest 
success in the drug import business. 

It was Malory's habit to take the two kills a month 
he needed from among humans who killed other 
humans for profit. He considered drug dealers in that 
category since most modem addictions were deadly. 
Lately, he'd been preying on del Rio's 
middle-management, a singularly superstitious lot. 

A few weeks ago, Malory had been surprised 
while feeding on a particularly satisfying kill, and had 
left the scene before disposing of the exsanguinated 
corpse. 

Rita had also been feeding on del Rio's 
organization, and it was possible that she, too, had 
made an error, leading them to her. Or they might 
have found her through him. 

The killers had left none of their paraphernalia 
behind. They hadn't needed to use it. Rita was so very 
young. Even when dragged from her sanctuary into the 
bright sun slanting in the window — it must have been 
about four p.m. from the angle — she hadn't been able 
to rouse herself enough to put up more than a token 
struggle. 

Her sleeping robe was tom. There were broken 
bones in her left foot. And Malory hadn't been there to 
help. 

Shaking with emotions he couldn't name, he 
knelt, gently placing his hands on the charred skull. It 
crumbled. "Rita, I swear by the gods of my fathers, the 
next blood I feast on will be that of your murderer — 
however long it takes." 

His chin dropped to his chest, and he choked on 
the unutterable need to cry. But of course, he could 
not. He yanked himself away from the remains and 
went to the well concealed closet which was her 
sanctuary. He'd had workmen build it into the back 
wall of her kitchen, concealed to look like a shallow 
pantry. Then, he had erased their memories. 

Now the shelf unit stood out from the wall next to 
the door. Inside, the bed was rumpled, a gold satin 
sheet spilling out onto the floor with a dirty shoe mark 
on it. 

The whistling tea kettle had been knocked off the 
stove and lay on its side in a puddle. 

He could almost hear her screams. 

He shuddered, fighting the inward visions, the 
pain. 

A long time later, careful to leave no trace of 
himself, he gathered the sheets, sealed the closet and 



snapped the pantry shelves in front of it, breaking the 
lock so the next tenant would not find it. He cleaned 
up the tea kettle. 

Then he rolled the charred remnants in the sheets, 
carried the bundle to the basement and disposed of it 
in the incinerator. It was the new, non-polluting kind. 
Even as young as she'd been, there'd be no traces left 
of a body. 

And now, he knew, he needed help — mortal 
help. With the negligence of millennia of practice, he 
took bat form. 

By three a.m. he was outside a town house a few 
blocks from his own, high on a cliff overlooking the 
ocean beach — an area that was usually heavily 
fogged in. He still had a few hours until the sun would 
drive him to sanctuary. 

Resolute, he turned to mist and sifted through the 
screen into the bedroom of David Silver. 

The human was snoring. Malory watched him 
fondly for a few moments, then whispered, "Dave! 
Dave, wake up!" 

The snoring arrested in mid-breath, and with a 
mumble and a start, David Silver sat up in bed. Then 
he relaxed. "Oh, it's just you. Wha'time'sit?" 

Malory told him, and Silver swore. "Why do you 
do this to me? Don't you know I need to sleep at 
night?" 

"Rita's been killed." 

"Oh. Is she okay?" 

"No! Mortals broke into her sanctuary and 
exposed her to the sun. She's gone." 

"Oh, no!" This time it was a cry of grief. For a 
time, the two had been lovers. Then Rita had become 
involved with Malory and decided to accept 
immortality, leaving Silver with this house and a 
whopping mortgage. Malory had extended the same 
offer to Silver, but he'd refused emphatically. 

Malory waited as Silver worked through the 
shock, the brief rage at Malory for making her a 
vampire, the reverse of blame to himself for letting her 
do it, and the realization that it had been her choice to 
make. And then there were wracking sobs that didn't 
pass quickly at all. 

Malory sat on the bed and put an arm around 
Silver's shoulders. For the vampire, the human's tears 
were a necessary cleansing he needed to share. When 
it was over, he felt the release into calm acceptance 
that he could not have achieved on his own. He let his 
forehead rest on Silver's shoulder, against his neck, to 
enhance the contact. 



VAMPIRE'S FAST 



31 



Sniffing, Silver asked, "Are you hungiy?" 

Malory pulled away. "No. I fed well only last 
night. I have sworn the next blood I take will be her 
killer's." 

Silver pushed his bedclothes aside and threw on a 
robe. "Come on," he said leading the way to the 
kitchen. "Tell me the whole story. I have to know it 
all." 

As Silver drank black coffee, Malory recounted 
what he knew. "So, Dave, I'm sworn to get them — 
and their boss as well. But I'm going to need help. 
Mortal help." 

Silver studied the dregs of his coffee. "I'm a 
tailor. I don't even have my own business. I work for a 
department store. I was never even in the army. I'm in 
terrible shape and I'm hopelessly clumsy. What can I 
do that you can't?" 

"Stay awake in the daytime — as my foes do." 

"Foes. How poetic." 

"I'm sorry. I read a lot." 

Silver gave him a cockeyed smile. "Foes. Okay. 
They killed her. They're my foes, too. What do I do?" 

"Guard me in the daytime. Let me use you to 
enlarge my sphere of awareness so none can come 
upon us unwarned." 

"Malory, I can't guard you all day. I have to 
work." 

"Quit your job. I'll put you on my payroll at 
double your current salary. Afterwards, you'll get a 
bonus that will let you open your own shop. Deal?" 

"I didn't know you were that rich." 

"I've had a while to work at it." 

"I suppose. You've never said how old you are." 

"I don't exactly know." He shrugged. "Millennia. 
Aren't you going to ask me what you really want to 
ask?" 

"You keep saying you can't read my mind." 

"It's more empathy and knowledge of human 
nature than telepathy. I said I want to use you, and you 
haven't objected to that. Why?" 

"I hate thinking about what you are." 

"If you're going to help me, you must think about 
it. You'll be my spare hands and eyes. I'll ruthlessly 
compel your actions — and they won't be slow or 
clumsy. If it comes to a fight. I'll use your body 
regardless of the injury it might take. But Dave — you 
could die." 

Silver was looking at him as if he'd never seen 
him before. "You could do all that?" 

"It's not even difficult." 



"But you've never — I mean, I've never felt 
you — " 

Malory reached across the table and took the 
man's hands in his own. "I wouldn't ever without your 
permission. Oh, I do erase memories, for my own 
security. And I cast illusions about myself. And I take 
blood from unknowing donors who never miss it. And, 
Dave, you know I kill humans for my own needs. But I 
have my own code of honor. I give you my word I've 
never used you, and I won't without your permission." 

Silver studied him warily. "I can't quite imagine 
what it would feel like, but the thought makes my skin 
crawl." 

"I could make it so you felt nothing — or I could 
take the memory away and leave a hole in your time, 
or I could fill it with the illusion of a Hawaiian 
vacation." 

Silver pulled away and went around the counter 
into the kitchen to get more coffee. He came back 
chewing on one nail and stared out the sliding door to 
the patio. "I don't want to lose the memory or 
remember something that didn't happen. I want to feel 
and remember whatever happens to me. For me, life is 
to be lived, every detail of it, right to the end. And it 
should end all in God's own good time." 

"If you like. I'll show you what it's like to be 
used." 

Back to the vampire. Silver whispered, "Okay. Do 
it." 

Malory closed his eyes and mentally reached for 
Silver, infiltrated his mind and took over his body. He 
made him walk back to the table, turn three times in 
place without sloshing the coffee, sit down, sip his 
coffee, and set the mug down without even rippling 
the surface. Then he made him grin and say, "That's 
amazing!" Then Malory let go. 

That was the mistake. At the sudden return to 
normal, Silver turned white, lips slightly green, and 
plunged into the kitchen where he stood gripping the 
sink and gasping as if expecting to heave up all the 
coffee he'd drunk. 

Malory was beside him in a blink, knowing that if 
he suppressed the nausea, he'd turn the man against 
him forever. He'd had permission for one 
demonstration, not two. So he just held Silver close. 
"I'm sorry. It's my fault. Breathe deeply. Hang on and 
breathe. It'll pass in a moment." 

And it did. Malory led him back to the table, 
explaining, "I let go too abruptly for you. Most people 
don't react so violently. It won't happen again." 



32 



GALAXY 



"Mai, I don't think I can take that. Even before — 
everything came unstuck — it was awful. I wasn't me. 
I even heard myself speak in my own voice, and it 
wasn't me.” 

His tone was the first indication Malory had that 
Silver had made up his mind to accept. "I can make it 
so you won't feel a sense of being — invaded — out of 
control." 

Silver shook his head. "I don't want — Malory, if 
I don't help you, what are you going to do?" 

"I'm sworn. I will kill them — one way or 
another." 

"That's another thing. I don't want to kill anyone. 
I just want to put them in jail." 

"For murdering a dead woman? Whose remains 
don't exist?" 

"Yeah." But he added, "Do you know how many 
times they jail the wrong person for murder, no matter 
how careful they are? How can we be sure we've got 
the right people?" 

"I can identify the hitmen. I only have to find 
them and discover who they work for. Then I've a 
plan, but I won't tell you unless you're with me — or 
I'd have to erase your memory to be sure it couldn't be 
tortured out of you." 

His gaze went to the graying light behind the 
windows. "Oh, Lord, they could be out there. They 
could have followed you. They could be coming after 
us right now." 

"They didn't. They aren't." At Silver's look, he 
said, "Being a vampire has to be good for something. 
Still, you're right, they just might trace you through 
Rita, and me through you. In the past, I've been 
attacked in my sanctuary during the day. The prospect 
frightens me, so I'm asking you to let me use you." 

"And you had to find her like that. It must have 
been hell on you." He scrubbed his face. "You mean, 
using me, you could be aware of things that are going 
on even in the daytime, when you're asleep?" 

"Yes. I need that because these people know the 
weaknesses of my kind." 

"God, I'm being such a coward. It's not any worse 
than being raped." 

Malory couldn't keep his reaction to that off his 
face. He wanted to run out of the house and never 
bother Dave again. But that wasn't an option. He 
needed the man. So he sat stiffly waiting. 

Dave reached across the table. "I didn't mean it 
that way. You're a friend. I could get used to being 
used by you, temporarily anyway." He forced a grin. 



"Hey, that was a neat trick with the coffee." 

Malory found a smile and pasted it on. "Thought 
you might appreciate that." 

"Okay, so tell me your plan. One way or another, 
we've got to do this — for Rita — so I'm in. Whatever 
it takes." 

"It's fairly simple. Once I locate the hitmen, I'll 
lure them and their boss into my home. They'll come 
in the daylight expecting to kill me easily. But you and 
I'll be ready — and they'll die instead." 

"You mean, you're going to use yourself as bait?" 

"Yes." 

"That must be like — like facing your worst 
nightmare." 

"Yes. That's why I need you. These days, I've no 
other mortal friends I could trust for this." 

"I'm ashamed. I shouldn't have hesitated to agree. 
Mai, do what you have to do so I can stand it. Don't let 
my — squeamishness — get in the way." 

Malory rose, and Silver got up with him, glancing 
at the paling of the window. "I guess you've got to go." 

"I was planning to stay here today. Remember the 
sanctuary I had built in your attic for Rita?" 

"She never used it. I'd forgotten about it." 

"With your permission — ?" 

"Well — sure. Are you afraid to go home?" 

"It would be unwise. And — I wished to be near 
you. Through your awareness, I can be roused, even 
during the day, if needed. Tonight, I'll check my 
security arrangements." 

Malory went to the window and examined the 
yard by the rising light. He had to admit it out loud. 
He owed the man that much. "And — Dave — I've 
been bereaved often in my time, but rarely so deeply. I 
just don't want to be alone." 

"I kinda feel the same way. Everybody else I know 
thinks she's been dead for years." 

"She has been, Dave, she has been." 

It went easier than Malory had expected. By the 
time he'd settled into the attic sanctuary, he'd adjusted 
his touch on Silver's mind to leave Silver with the feel 
of his presence without the impression of being 
violated. 

By noon, it had become comfortable for both of 
them. By sundown, they'd worked out signals that 
would let Silver ask for privacy, and let Malory ask 
for admission. The link was clear and pure, like 
holding a private mental conversation. It had been 
centuries since Malory had worked with such an easy 
link. He'd miss it desperately when this was over. 



VAMPIRE'S FAST 



33 



Silver spent the day on the phone arranging to 
take his three weeks vacation instead of giving three 
weeks notice. And he'd followed the detailed 
instructions Malory had left for ordering the 
construction work. 

When Malory rose, Silver was packed to move to 
Malory's house. Things were already in progress there. 
A decorator Malory'd used before had removed all the 
furniture from the living room and installed a large, 
carpeted pedestal in the center of the room, along with 
a grand piano in one comer, complete with silver 
candelabra. 

The next day, workmen from a security contractor 
Malory relied on would rig the shutters on his living 
room windows — the huge bay windows overlooking 
the beach and Dave's house — to close when weight 
came onto the floor near the pedestal. 

When Malory woke, he called the undertaker he'd 
had "bury" Rita years ago, and ordered an ostentatious 
coffin to be delivered — black with a red satin lining. 
It would fit perfectly on the pedestal. 

Late that night, visiting the security contractor at 
his home in San Jose, Malory carefully planted 
instructions to have the coffin altered. When the lid 
was raised by outside handles, an anesthetic spray 



Like the second acts of two 
thoroughly exciting plays, next 
month's installments of Jacqueline 
Lichtenberg's VAMPIRE'S FAST 
and Robert Sheckley's CITY OF 
THE DEAD lead us on through the 
intricate headspaces of two of the 
world's greatest writers. 

Prepare yourself for some 
fabulous stories by your favorites 
and ours -- and be on the lookout 
for the theme issues coming up soon. We're trying to time the womens' issue for the vernal 
equinox if stories reach us on time for editing, typesetting, proofing, etc. — and it’s the etc. 
that worries us most. That's the stuff that happens after the camera-ready is ready for 
presstime. 

There are some real treats and surprises in store for GALAXY readers in the coming 
months. One of the most wonderful surprises for GALAXIANS everywhere is that Floyd 
C. Gale has agreed to run the GALAXY 5-Star Shelf again! 

Stay tuned for incredible news from GALAXY! 



Galaxy 



FORECAST 



would saturate the area. He also had invisible spy 
cameras placed all about the living room, the monitors 
banked in the bedroom just above it. 

The automatic devices installed in the living room 
could also be controlled from a console in that 
bedroom. The console could also flood the lower floor 
with C0 2 foam. That would be Silver's station during 
the days of waiting. 

It was a long, tedious job to implant the details of 
the instructions then erase the memory of who'd given 
the orders. The workmen, he'd take care of as they 
finished their jobs. 

With that done, Malory rechecked every sanctuary 
he had installed around the Bay Area, every lookout 
he had planted at key locations near those sanctuaries, 
every point where any mortal might pick up a lead on 
his activities. But there was no hint that del Rio's 
people had found him. 

— JACQUELINE LICHTENBERG 

continued next issue 







34 



GALAXY 




PERFECTLY PRESERVED 

by CHUCK ROTHMAN 

Illustrated by Metzger 






he ancient fluorescent lights flickered on, 
illuminating the whiteness of the 
cryogenic chamber. A bone-chilling cold 
permeated the air. 

"Perfectly preserved," whispered Lorin, looking 
over the myriad rows of man-sized tubes. "The 
automatic power never failed, even during the worst 
of the wars." 

Beside him, Klaak was awed nearly to 
speechlessness. "So many of them." 

Lorin smiled at the boy's reaction, so much like 
his own when he was young. "From the 21st century," 
he said, appraising the age of the units. "Maybe older. 
Waiting here until we had advanced enough to thaw 



them out." He surveyed the containers with a look of 
satisfaction. "Let's tell the rest." 

They retraced their path through the ancient 
rubble until they reached the surface. 

The others waited anxiously on the barren ground. 
There was much that their ancestors could provide. 

Lorin smiled as all eyes went to him. "Look, 
they're perfectly preserved," he said. A roar of delight 
came from the tribe and a chant, "Fresh meat tonight!" 
rang out spontaneously as they bore several revered 
ancestors back to the village, to prepare the new year's 
very first Thanksgiving Roast. 

—CHUCK ROTHMAN 







WHAT COMES NATURALLY 



35 




WHAT COMES NATURALLY 

by GREG COSTIKYAN 

Illustrated by Larsen 



e've only got six minutes of fuel left, Flight 
Captain, said the game. Desperately, I 
punched at the control console. A line of 
holes stitched the left wing, and an engine began to 
sputter. We're going down, Cap’nl A holographic 
explosion filled the viewspace, to be replaced by the 
Crawford Entertainment logo. 

"Where'd you get the game, boy?" Pa demanded 
from the doorway. 

"Huh? Jimmy copied it for me." 

"Copied, eh? You didn't pay for it, then." 

I blinked. "Well, no, Pa. He just copied it. Took 
maybe fifteen seconds." 

Pa grunted. "Yep, easy as pie. Comes natural, does 
piracy." 

Oh, crap. Janie's head peered round the door, 



smirking; she could always tell when I was gonna get 
it. But Pa just pulled over a chair and sat down. 

"Now, see here, son," he said. "When you buy a 
game, you ain't paying for the memory bubble and the 
box. You're payin' for maybe a coup la man-years of 
work. The cost of the product is labor and 
imagination, not materials. A man's got a right to the 
fruits of his own intellectual endeavor. When you 
copy a game, you're stealin' — same's when you 
sneak out the door to the gun store with a box of shells 
in your pocket." I winced; that was last year's 
transgression. 

"How long you played that game?" Pa asked. 

"Total?" I said. "Maybe. ..twenty hours. Good 
game." 

"Right," said Pa. "I got a load of LA Times just in; 






36 



GALAXY 



after you help me shred 'em and feed the sheep, you 
and me's going down to the software store and you're 
gonna buy yourself a legal copy." 

"But Pa! That'll be a couple million NewBucks!" 

"You got the money in the bank, boy. Won't kill 
you." 

"But Pa!" I'd worked hard for that money. 

Complaining didn't do me any good, though. I 
followed Pa out to the feed lot and shredded the 
newspapers. Janie went to look at her ewe and lambs. 
Pa fed paper shreds by handfuls to the lambs. 

"Great critters, these geneteered sheep," Pa said 
fondly, running his fingers through wool. 

"Sure saves bucks on the feed bill," I said. They 
thrived on newsprint. Seemed to like the color 
supplements best. 

Pa went over to look at Janie's sheep. They were 
her 4-H project: She was raising them until they were 
old enough to sell. Would have depressed me — you 
hafta slaughter sheep young. Only a few grow up to 
breed the next generation. Generally, Pa didn’t keep 
any; he bought pregnant ewes from Milehi 
Geneteering, fattened the lambs, and sold them to 
meat processors. But he'd let Janie raise a little ram, 
and breed her own. 

Janie loved that farm, and loved 4-H. Me, I 
wanted off, soon's I was able. 

Pa was pitchforking shredded paper into the feed 
trough. "Where you goin', boy?" he shouted. 

"Down to the mall with Jimmy," I shouted back — 
then noticed the absence of the hover truck. 

"Ma and Janie's got the hover," Pa said. "Took 
Janie and her lambs to the County Fair." 

Crap. I wasn't going anywhere. 

'"Sides," said Pa, "I gotta load of Portland 
Oregonians coming in. Need you ta help me run 
the shredder." 

"But Pa...." Some days you just can't win. 



Must have been three, four hours later, county 
cops showed up. Ma and Janie sat in the back of the 
police hover, looking kinda scared behind the iron 
grille, some guy in a business suit sat in the front seat. 
Pa pulled up his overalls. "What the crap is this?" he 
shouted. Stupid, if you ask me. I know better than to 
yell at cops. They'll lay open your head, give 'em half 
a chance. 

"You Charles Johnson?" asked the deputy. 

"Sure thing." 

"You the father of Jane Johnson?" 

"Betcha." 

"You're under arrest." 

"What for?" 

"Bio-piracy." 

"What the crap?" 

"This is Mr. Ehara from Milehi Geneteering. Says 
you been illegally copying his sheep." 

Pa didn't know what to say. 

"Mr. Johnson," said Ehara, "these sheep are 
genetically engineered under U.S. Patent 92, 788, 346. 
Under US patent law, it's a federal crime to illegally 
copy a patented device." 

"Copy a patented device?" said Pa in a daze. 

"Didn't you read your WetWare agreement?" 
asked Ehara. "We sell you the sheep for meat- 
processing purposes only. You're not allowed to breed 
them, Mr. Johnson." 

"Well, dang," said Pa. "Them sheep was only 
doing what comes naturally." 

The cops hauled 'em off: Janie, our little felon, 
heh-heh; Ma and Pa, too — they was in loco parentis. 
Felons, all. They'd probably let 'em out on bail; 
meantime, I got the spread to myself. I found the key 
to Pa's liquor cabinet and gave Jimmy a call. 

We were going to have us one hell of a good time, 
yessireeBoi! 

—GREG COSTIKYAN 



PRESS BUTTON 
FOR CATALOG 

IF BUTTON IS OUT OF SERVICE, 
ORDER ONE YEAR OF GALAXY 
AND GET CATALOG FREE. 




CIGARBOX 



37 




CIGARBOX 

by DAVID KYLE 

Illustrated by Larsen 



hen grandma died she left a cigarbox 
filled with bits and pieces of memorabilia 
from my childhood. The box held a 
remarkable secret — she had shaped my life by 
reading my future. 

The last time I saw her alive, she was propped up 
in her huge bed, almost drowning in her antique 
comforter — the cigarbox was in her lap. "Inside this 
little cigar box are my treasures," she told me. "Some 
day you will see them. And I will tell you things." But 
she was weak and drained of energy and didn't open 
the box. "Tomorrow I will tell you everything." I 
sensed a mystery. I waited impatiently from visit to 
visit for the tomorrow that did not come. Within two 



months she was gone. 

After the funeral when I was back at the house, 
my wife and I and the old housekeeper sorted out her 
things before the sale. It was then — just before they 
auctioned it all off — that I got the cigarbox and 
opened it up. My wife, a practical person, had some 
faint hope that besides the inevitable letters and 
photographs we would discover money and jewels and 
valuable papers, which could have made our life easier 
and assisted us toward planned parenthood. The 
money was only a few old copper coins; the papers, 
souvenirs from past events — and the jewels.. .an ivory 
wedding ring, beads with a plastic crucifix, bracelets 
with religious designs, American Indian earrings — 





38 



GALAXY 



and a little crystalline stone, its natural, unpolished 
facets thrusting up from its rough base. The crystal, 
wrapped in crumpled paper, was about the size and 
shape of the two joints of my thumb. 

It looked valuable to me, and immediately I knew 
that this was where the mystery lay.. .Without really 
thinking, yet careful to shield my action from my wife 
and mother, I pocketed the wrapped stone... silently 
claiming it for myself. 

That little box held a wealth of memories from my 
childhood, almost exclusively devoted to me. There 
had been a faded picture of my grandfather, young and 
handsome in his uniform, taken shortly before his 
death; a dozen pictures of my father at various ages in 
his life — all rather grim-faced, if not simply sullen, 
for with his chronic illnesses he never had been a 
happy man. I was surprised at how suppressed those 
memories had become. Obviously, though, I had been 
the warm sunbeam in my grandmother's life... however, 
thinking of her now was like peering into a swirling 
mist in my mind. Pleasant images, somewhat 
out-of-focus, came to me as I held the crystal. I was 
overpowered by my feeling of love for her. 

I had been her only grandchild — so very 
important to her. We had been best friends to each 
other. At the time when my father moved us away 
from her home, I was twelve and very upset. But she 
told me then that it was all for the best. Over the years 
I would occasionally visit her, but she grew very old 
and her mind slowly, gradually lost its focus. My wife 
and I would go back to the old homestead for visits, 
but my greatest regret was that she never saw nor 
enjoyed her great-grandchildren to come, but I had 
always brought great joy to her. 

Always? No, not always. One evening, alone, I 
suddenly, vividly, remembered. That crystalline stone, 
loosely wrapped in paper in the palm of my hand, 
became the one terrible time in my youth. Once in my 
past, and only once, as a boy, my conduct had been a 
terrible disappointment to my mother. I remember her 
screaming at me and taking me into the bathroom for 
the paddling I deserved, something my frequently 
absent father never did. My mother's rage — 
"Stealing! The shame of it! For a piece of glass! How 
could you do this to the family! I'm so embarrassed! I 
don't care if he said you should keep it to remind you 
of your sin. I'll never be able to go into that store 
again! Tomorrow you will have to take it back." 

And I had protested, "The man who caught me 
said — if I promised not to do it again — ever — he 



would forgive me and give it to me. I promised him. 
He warned you'd yell at me — but forgive me, too." 

She was unfair, I thought, much too agitated to be 
reasonable, so I suffered both emotionally and 
physically. I promised never to steal again, and I cried 
and ran to grandmother at the first opportunity. 

While my mother fumed, grandmother took the 
stone and called the store owner and apologized for 
my behavior and for my mother's hysteria and agreed 
to keep the glass stone only if he would accept 
payment for it. "I want my grandson to keep it 
always... to remind him of his mistake and of your kind 
understanding," she told him on the phone. He sent 
her a written reply, a sort of combined receipt and 
best-wishes note, I was led to believe — and forgave 
my petty theft as an irresistible temptation. All this we 
hid from my mother for her own peace of mind. 

That was the stone which now, in my hand, 
brought the memories flooding back. I recalled that 
from time to time, she used to produce the crystal 
from some hidden place, and set it upright on its flat 
end on the mantelpiece for a day or two after I had 
done something which she felt was exceptionally 
wrong. Before I married, she held the stone in her 
cupped hands and predicted our lifeline of happiness. 
What had to be, she said, had to be. 

This bizarre fortune telling had begun with my 
sneaky theft years ago — was it now ending with 
another sneaky theft by me? 

I understood that childhood conspiracy of silence 
shared with my grandmother. My very religious 
mother would have protested the keeping of the stolen 
object. As for my father, we never did communicate 
anyhow. When I took a wife, I confided all I knew to 
her although it meant she feared for my soul. So, the 
years had passed. 

Then, on this evening as I held the stone in my 
hand, the thought suddenly struck me that I had 
overlooked the obvious. The crumpled piece of paper 
around the stone could have some significance. The 
paper was certainly of fine quality, high in 
rag-content, like thin parchment. With extreme care, I 
flattened it out into a small square. It was as soft as 
cloth from an age long ago, yellowed but not brittle; a 
faint gray spidery design seemed to be traced on one 
side. Was that writing? I held it closely under the 
strong desk lamp, and peered closely at it through the 
powerful magnifying glass. 

Slowly, as if by a conjurer's trick, I saw words 
faintly forming. 



CIGARBOX 



39 



By straining my eyes, looking hard, writing down 
bits of what I seemed to see, I read a message. 

Dear Madame, I expected your call... I accept 
your payment... The lifelines stone is yours... Your 
grandson's action was inevitable... Through you, the 
crystal foretells his paths... As the stone has found 
you, fate has found its way to me. Now lean die. Good 
wishes and farewell, until... There was no signature. 

The man who wrote the note, the man who had 
been my victim and who had made us his victim, had 
indeed, died weeks later. My mother for a long time 
seemed to carry a sense of vicarious guilt that her son 
had contributed to his passing. My grandmother 
accepted the situation without any visible reaction and 
never mentioned him nor the note. 

As these thoughts passed through my head, the 
words on the ancient paper seemed to blur into 
illegibility. My scrawled notes were still there, 
unaffected, but the old paper had only the suggestion 
of writing on it, as before. Perhaps I had imagined the 
words I had seen.. .or perhaps an old memory had 
returned? 

I held the crystal up to one eye. I looked into it 



deeply. There was life flickering within, vague and 
misty behind the faint network of lines. The next day I 
took the crystal to a jeweler. Was it unusual? Did it 
have great value? No, it was a simple unpolished stone 
— unpolished, despite my vigorous efforts to rub up 
the stone into a sparkling brilliance. I complained of 
the tiny scratches on its many faces. The usual growth 
lines of a natural stone, he said. Lustre would come 
with their removal. So, with his diamond dust wheel, 
he polished it. As the lines disappeared, the crystal's 
brilliance grew. 

My crystal was now a glittering gem. Its surfaces 
were alive with light. I held it up close to one eye 
again. What I saw was also different. In its heart it was 
dead. The realization of what I had done came to me 
with a sickening rush of horror. Life lines'. 1 had not 
understood the full meaning of the word. 1 had 
scrubbed away its natural, magical power. 
Irretrievably gone. 

Oh, gramma, how could I have known? 

— DAVID KYLE 




Somebody's gotta 
pay for this 

magazine... and it ain't 
gonna be us. 



So, HERE'S THE DEAL: 

You can buy SO bucks worth of stuff outta the Official Galaxy Catalog, which 
is automatically sent to Galaxy subscribers anyway, and we'll thank you with 

a complimentary one-year Galaxy subscription for your $50 order. 

OR, don't buy anything from the Galaxy catalog, and don't subscribe, and 
see how long we keep sending you Galaxy. 

OR, send in your $18 for a basic U.S bulk-rate subscription, $22 for a first-class 
subscription, $28 for a Canadian subscription, $30 for a Great Britain / 
European subscription, or $32 for a Pacific Rim subscription — and we'll thank 
you with a $10 Merchandise Certificate applicable toward any purchase 
outta the Official Galaxy Catalog. 

Gee, what a bargain that U.S. bulk-rate seems compared to the overseas 
mailing costs, eh? Anyhow, you do that, and we'll send you the catalog 
free, okay? 



CALL TODAY t-800-869-0658 SUBSCRIBE NOW 



40 



GALAXY 




LET SLEEPING SIGILS LIE 

by LAWRENCE SCHIMEL 



Illustrated by van Rijn 



( chill of magic ran down Isabel’s spine as 
|| she bent to pick a handful of blue morels. 
^ y She glanced about the forest with her 
magesight — the trees glowing amber with 
amethyst dryads nestled in their centers, the ground 
outlined in pale green with occasional yellow nebulae, 
the mushrooms she reached for, the electric blue of 
summer lightning — but nowhere saw any magic out 
of the ordinary. Isabel puzzled over the warning she 
had felt as she stared at the mushrooms again without 
the magesight, then picked them, tucking them into a 
pouch at her waist. 

Isabel stood again, stretching the muscles in her 
legs and flexing her knees. She took a last peek at the 
forest under magesight before the trip home. 

To her right, a red glow, partly obscured by the 
trees and underbrush. Isabel moved cautiously. 



scanning the ground around her for traps. As she drew 
nearer, Isabel recognized it was a sigil. Invisible to 
normal sight, her magesight assured her that she stood 
before it. 

The sigil was of protection, designed to protect an 
object from physical harm. It was a basic glyph, 
learned early in apprenticeship. "But why would 
someone construct one out here?" Isabel whispered to 
herself. It seemed useless. Unless it was being used to 
cover some other magic as a misdirection. Isabel 
looked deeper with her magesight and saw the boy 
trapped under the sigil, lying under one of the glyph’s 
markings so as to be hidden by it. She had to free him. 
She reached into the half-realm where the sigil 
actually rested, and broke the edge of the glyph. It 
snapped as easily as a twig, and Sigil and boy became 
visible to normal sight again. 




LET SLEEPING SIGILS LIE 



41 



The sigil had been constructed from natural 
objects lying nearby. A curved branch formed an arc 
of the circle, followed by a string of river pebbles. 
One of the inside strokes of the glyph was made from 
a patch of blue morels like those she had sought, and a 
furrow traced part of the bottom arc. The rest of the 
sigil was constructed from deadwood and twigs. The 
boy lay twisted, as if he were still trapped under the 
mark of the glyph. Isabel checked with her magesight 
to see if he were still under another spell, but found 
none. 

Looking at him with normal sight again, she found 
him sitting upright in the center of the glyph, rubbing 
sleep from his eyes. "What did you have to wake me 
up for? It will take forever to find another twig that 
size to replace the one you broke." He pointed to the 
broken twig at Isabel’s feet. 

"You did this to yourself?" 

"Of course I did. Couldn’t you see I was part of 
the glyph?" 

Isabel stared at him dumbly for a moment. 
"Actually, I thought you were trapped under it. I 
couldn’t believe anyone would just build a protection 
glyph out here in the middle of nowhere unless they 
were hiding something." 

"I was hiding something," the boy stood and faced 
Isabel, flailing emphatically with his arms. "I was 
hiding myself. I didn’t want to get eaten while I was 
asleep. It’s very safe in there. If I’m part of a glyph, I 
sink into the half-realm with it. Safe, that is, unless 
meddling mages come by and break your sigils." 

"I’m sorry," Isabel said calmly, trying to ignore 
the formulae for various curses which seemed on the 
tip of her tongue. "I thought I was doing you a favor 
by setting you free." 

"Well, you weren’t. You woke me up, after only 
three hours. And I was having the nicest dreams..." He 
looked dreamy as his eyes lost focus, remembering. 

"I’ll let you get back to sleep then, and be on my 
way. Sorry, again, for having awakened you." 

The boy woke out of his trance. "Hey, not so fast." 
He smiled, beatifically. "You could at least help me 
find another twig to replace the one you broke." 

Isabel sighed. She guessed it was the least she 
could do after having broken his sigil in the first place. 

Isabel stepped out of the scribe’s shop, holding 
her new book in a bag at her side. As she walked 
down the street, she thought about how she would sit 
with a pot of tea and a long candle and read late into 



the night. Behind her was the sound of running feet. 
As Isabel began to turn towards the noise, the bag was 
torn out of her grasp. She tried to hold onto it, but the 
cutpurse had it firmly, and kept running up the street. 
Isabel bolted after him, knowing that if she stopped to 
cast a spell, he would get away down some alley 
before she was done. Sure enough — on the next 
block he ducked into an alley. Isabel followed right 
behind him, her arms swinging wildly as she rounded 
the corner too quickly. He was already at the end of 
the alley, turning left. Isabel sprinted after him, and 
suddenly felt her back spasm as she found herself in 
the middle of a spell. 

She panicked. "Of all the stupid things," she 
berated herself while she broke free, "to walk into a 
trap like this." The spell tore easily; it was a simple 
sigil which she broke without setting it off. 

"What?" a familiar voice groggily mumbled 
behind her. "Oh, I should have known it would be you 
again." 

Isabel turned around, dreading. It was that boy 
again. He was lying on the floor of the alleyway, 
debris spread around him in the form of a protection 
sigil. 

"Why?" Isabel screamed at no one in particular, 
"Why me?" 

"That’s what I’d like to know. Why can’t a body 
get any sleep around these parts? How do you expect 
me to grow if you keep waking me up?" 

"Sleep! Do you know that because of you I just 
lost a rare spellbook that I paid 300 crowns for? And 
you come to me crying about sleep! I’ve a mind to 
rend you limb from limb and then you’ll rest in 
peace!" 

"Well, aren’t we cranky today? That time of the 
month again, when you go yelling and screaming and 
waking up little children?" 

Isabel raised her hand to slap him, then controlled 
her rage. "The mouth on you!" She whispered a spell 
at the barrel of trash at the end of the alley, which 
proceeded to upend itself over the boy. "Lie there in 
the trash. It’s where you belong." Isabel walked away, 
still fuming, both at the boy and the loss of her book. 

The farmer’s fields were under heavy curses, the 
causes of a rather severe blight. Magic was laced 
through the corn and wheat as thick as the weeds. 
"This," Isabel told herself, in a high, melodramatic 
tone, "is the problem with being a mage in the employ 
of the town in which you live. Whatever happened to 



42 



GALAXY 



the good old days of fighting off dragons and going on 
quests?" 

Isabel sized up the fields again, deciding on spells 
to use and how much energy she would need to 
perform each part. "Who’re you trying to kid, Iz? You 
were always happier tinkering with a garden than 
running around on some quest. And you never once 
fought a dragon." Isabel talked to herself whenever 
she worked with plants, as well as to the plants 
themselves. It helped them grow. 

Isabel formed the glyph images in her mind. 
"Everybody ready now?" she asked the fields of wheat 
and corn before her. She reached out with her mind 
and began stripping magic from the field, peeling 
away layers of curses that were heaped on like manure 
— spells, cantrips, glyphs, sigils — every sort of 
magic that could be cast. "Someone really had it in for 
this farmer. Those spells must have cost a fortune." 
Isabel clenched her jaw as she began to concentrate 
harder. "Maybe he owed some mage his firstborn or 
something, and welched on the debt. Even at the 
town’s rates my fees would have been that high to do 
something like this." Sweat began to bead on Isabel’s 
brow. "If I ever decided to do something like this." 

Even cleared of curses, the crops were still 
suffering. Isabel took a deep breath, stretched her 
arms and legs, and cracked her back. She looked up at 
the sky with her magesight, found enough moisture 
there, and began to cast a long, slow spell to cause a 
soft rain. Drops began to fall on her upturned face and 
Isabel smiled. To mess with the weather was a tricky 
affair; it was so easy for things to get out of hand, 
often with disastrous consequences. But even 
concentrating on keeping the weather under control, 
Isabel found the rain soothing, after the hard work of 
removing the curses. She stood on the edge of the 
field, being bathed with the crops and feeling happy 
and contented at a job well done. 

Out of the comer of her eye Isabel saw a 
movement. She drew a portion of her attention from 
the storm and glanced in its direction. Down her back 
came the warming flash of magic being used and 
Isabel loosed control of the rain to face the threat. A 
scarecrow ambled haphazardly toward her, as if the 
person controlling the spell did not know how to use 
it, or did not have the control to keep it going very 
well. The scarecrow would stumble in her direction, 
rest a moment, then veer off to the side when it moved 
again. Slowly it zig-zagged its way toward her. 

Tracing the spell back to its controller, Isabel 



recognized the boy from the sigils and somehow 
resisted the urge to scream. He couldn’t tell that he’d 
been discovered. She smiled, viciously, and began 
remembering all those curses she had just lifted from 
the farmer’s fields. "So he thinks he can be rude to a 
mage and get away with it, does he? We’ll see about 
that. If he wants to play rough, then we’ll just have to 
play rough." Isabel reviewed all the curses she knew, 
and found one ideally suited for an upstart teen like 
him. She cast it at him slowly, taking time to savor the 
sweet feeling of revenge. He wouldn’t be bothering 
her anymore. 

Around her a storm began to rage, rain beating 
down on the crops weakened by blight. Isabel cursed 
in frustration that this distraction had allowed the 
storm to get out of hand. Wind whipped her hair, 
stinging her eyes. Isabel struggled to regain control of 
the storm and it fought her, wind and rain growing 
more violent in a frenzied peak before her trained 
mind wrested the power back. The wind died abruptly, 
and the rain slowed to a drizzle. The crops drooped 
miserably. Tired and completely drained, Isabel hoped 
the brat caught a cold. 

When the eggs she had just purchased slipped 
from her basket and cracked against the sidewalk, 
Isabel knew things were about to get worse. She was 
afraid to look up the street to where her house stood; 
just an ordinary house, one of a row of similar small 
houses on the street. It had been a peaceful two days 
since her last warning, since her run-in with that 
foul-mouthed boy.... 

"No!" Isabel cried as she ran toward her house. As 
she drew nearer she saw that three of the pickets were 
missing from the fence, as well as her two, extremely 
rare, specially hybridized rose bushes. "No, no, no, no, 
Noooo!" she cried again. "Why?!" 

Isabel did not even need to use her magesight to 
know that the protection sigil was there. She sighed 
wistfully, looking at the missing rose bushes, and 
thought of her two days of peace. Isabel placed her 
basket on the front porch then turned back to the sigil. 
She closed her eyes, steadied herself, then calmly 
broke the edge of the sigil. Boy, pickets, and rose 
bushes all came into sight. 

The boy rubbed sleep out of his eyes, looked up 
and saw Isabel looming over him, and screamed. 
Isabel smothered the smile which tried to creep onto 
her face. The case of acne with which she had cursed 
him was glowing slightly, even though it was not very 



LET SLEEPING SIGILS LIE 



43 



dark. "I’m sorry," the boy continued. "I really am. I 
didn’t mean what I said. Please forgive me." 

"Tell me something; why are you tormenting me? 
What did I ever do to you that you’re haunting me 
now?" 

"I’m not. It’s purely by accident." 

"Accident? You expect me to believe that it’s an 
accident that you chose my house out of which to 
construct your sigil? To use my rare hybrid rose 
bushes as part of your little prank? Just be thankful 
you didn’t harm them!" 

"Honestly, it was an accident. I didn’t know it was 
your house. I would never have used it if I’d known." 
The feeling’s mutual, Isabel thought. 

"Well, I’m not going to stand for this little joke 
any longer. Tell me why you keep doing this and then 
stay away from me. Go back to your master and 
torment him." 

"I don’t have a master. I don’t have anything." He 
gestured at the remains of his sigil. "These keep me 
safe from almost everything. And what it doesn’t, I 
couldn’t stop anyway. You think I’m doing this as a 
joke?" 

Isabel considered him carefully, to make sure he 
wasn’t trying to play off her pity. "If you haven’t got a 
master or someplace to stay, then why are you 
sleeping all the time? You should be working, trying 
to make a living, instead of getting in the way of old 
women minding their own business." 

"It’s easier if I sleep all the time. I’m less hungry 
that way." 

Isabel didn’t care if he was just playing off her 
pity, he was good at it. Too good at it, Isabel thought, 
as she felt the knife in her heart twist again. She 
sighed. She would never have imagined that she 
would ever be kind to him, ever say something like 
this to him after the way he had treated her. But she 
took a deep breath, closed her eyes, and managed to 
spill out the words, quickly, "Do you want something 
to eat?" 

The boy stared at her silently for a long moment. 
"Are you sure?" 

"Yes." But make it fast, before I change my mind. 
"Come on in." Isabel walked to the porch. She picked 
up her basket, then turned to find him still lingering at 
the gate. "Come on," she repeated and walked into her 
house, leaving him to follow or not as he chose. She 
had made the attempt, offering him food, ignoring his 
earlier remarks and actions. He followed her in. 

"First, let me give you something to clear up that 



acne. If I’m going to talk to you while you eat I don’t 
want to be looking at it the entire time." Isabel looked 
at him over her shoulder as she unpacked the groceries 
from her basket onto their proper shelves of pantry. 
"Besides, it glows too brightly indoors." 

Isabel tried not to giggle, but his acne glowing 
violently green was nearly too much for her. She 
busied herself with putting the foodstuffs away and 
asked him what he wanted to eat. 

"Anything’s fine," he replied, standing before her 
wall of spices and herbs. 

"Anything," Isabel sighed. "Fine. So tell me what 
happened to your master," she asked, trying to make 
conversation. 

There was a crash, followed closely by a bright 
blue flash. Isabel spun around, dropping the three 
parsnips she held. The boy now glowed electric blue, 
with kelley-green polkadots where his acne showed 
through. Around him was the powdered dust from the 
blue morels she had picked earlier in the week, their 
container in shards at his feet. 

He looked so pitiful, and yet so funny, glowing 
green and blue, that Isabel could not help laughing. 

"Don’t you know not to touch? Well, don’t just 
stand there; clean up the mess you’ve made. Better 
yet, don ’t. Sit there, and don ’t move." 

Shortly beford dawn, Isabel breezed up the stairs 
without a creak and quietly opened the door to his 
bedroom. He lay in bed, still soundly asleep. Isabel 
watched him for a moment as the light grew stronger, 
dimming the bluish glow his face still retained. She 
whispered a spell at the neighbor’s rooster, waking 
him a bit early. She counted to ten and was rewarded 
by the sound of crowing from the fence between the 
neighbor’s and her cottage. Isabel moved to the bed, 
leaned over him, and shook him vigorously. "Rise and 
shine, you lazy apprentice. The sun’s up." 

He woke with a start, sitting rigid in the middle of 
the bed, his face pale, his jaws agape with shock. 
Isabel smiled. She had wanted to do that for days now. 

"Out of bed, I said. There’s work to be done." 

He looked at her grinning face, let everything sink 
in, then flopped backwards into the pillows, pulling 
the covers over his head. 

Isabel smiled. She would enjoy having an 
apprentice again. 

—LAWRENCE SCHIMEL 



44 



GALAXY 




THE MAN WITH NINE LIVES 

Vincent Price 1911 - 1993 

by FORREST J ACKERMAN 



Photo by Daugherty 



INCENT LEONARD PRICE JR. became the senior 
citizen of sinister cinema in the latter years of his life, 
following in the footsteps of Lon Chaney Sr., Boris 
Karloff and Bela Lugosi. But more than a macabre filmonster 
star, St. Vincent (as he was regarded by his fans), as a whole 
person was a Renaissance man. 

(1) Consummate movie actor, yes, also in mundane movies 
such as Laura and (his favorite) The Eve Of St. Mark. In the Cecil 
B. DeMille biblical spectacle The Ten Commandments he essayed 
the dramatic role of an Egyptian architect. 

(2) One-man show and spellbinding raconteur. He took on 
the persona of the controversial Oscar Wilde and portrayed him 
more than 800 times. 

(3) Art critic and connoisseur par excellence. His home in 
the Hollywood hills was a treasure trove of classic paintings and 
vintage sculptures. 

(4) Legitimate stage actor, playing opposite the grand dame 
of the theatre, Helen Hayes, in Victoria Regina. 

(5) Radio actor directed by the 22-year-old genius who pan- 
icked America with the War Of The Worlds broadcast, Orson 
Welles. Among other roles for Welles he played Captain Hook in 
Peter Pan and the Devil in Damn Yankees. 

(6) Author. With his son Vincent Barrett, he co-authored a 
book about filmonsters and authored a “visual autobiography”, “I 
Like What I Know”, which he brought up to date in 1978. 

(7) Kitchen cook king with a book of recipes to his credit 



and an appearance on the Johnny Carson show, demonstrating his 
Gustatory techniques. 

(8) Television personality, appearing in episodes of Mystery 
Show, Science Fiction Theater, Man From U.N.C.L.E., Batman, 
Voyage To The Bottom Of The Sea, Night Gallery, Time Express, 
Alfred Hitchcock and, among numerous others. Lights Out. But as 
long as there are movie theaters, TV and videocassettes, it will 
never be lights out for Vincent Price. He was honored by the 
Count Dracula Society and the Academy of Science Fiction, Fan- 
tasy & Horror Films, and in recent years received a Grimmy on 
the nationally televised awards show. Horror Hall of Fame. 

He played approximately 50 roles in imagi-movies and TV 
terrorvision tales, titles which come to mind including House Of 
Wax, Master Of The World, The Tingler, The Fall Of The House 
Of Usher, The Abominable Dr. Phibes, The Raven, The Pit And 
The Pendulum and The House On Haunted Hill. 

(9) I knew him personally as a human being. Real mensch. 
One of Nature’s noblemen. Kind, considerate, charitable, humble, 
caring — all these positive attributes and more should be summed 
up in any dictionary as: Vincent Price. It is occasionally said upon 
the passing of a great man, “We shall not see his kind again.” 
This could be said of Vincent Price. I will say it. In fact I will say 
it again: “We shall not see his kind again.” 

Sleep well. Sweet Price. 

-FORREST J ACKERMAN 




LAST APPOINTMENT 



45 




LAST APPOINTMENT 



by ARTHUR JEAN COX 

Illustrated by Durer 



octor Ives sits alone in his laboratory. 

I ♦ 1 Alone, because Death has come for his 

co-workers, one by one. He sits on a stool 
beside his work-counter, shirt sleeve rolled back past 
the left elbow. On the counter by that elbow, a watch, 
at which he glances from time to time as if afraid of 
missing an appointment. He glances at it now: the 
time is 4:17 and 12 seconds. 

In his right hand he holds a syringe. 

He is a fairly young man, surely not more than 
thirty-five, but with prematurely white hair. He and 
his colleagues have been laboring for years on a drug 
to extend human longevity.. .and which the newsmedia 
persist in calling "an immortality serum" — a 
sensationalistic phrase that generated scoffing 
publicity and interfered with funding. Still, they had 
pressed on, and for much of the last few years had felt 
themselves separated from success only by the 



narrowest of margins. Again and again, it had seemed 
within their grasp and, again and again, they had been 
proven fatally wrong. One by one, Death had come for 
them, and only he is left. 

After the deaths of two volunteer subjects and 
Doctor Arthur Lake, Nobel Laureate and Head of the 
Institute, the Government had forbidden further 
testing of this series of drugs on human subjects. But 
those who were left — unable to relinquish the great 
prize that lay so close at hand (the mayflies had lived 
a whole year now with no noticeable ill-effects) — 
had carried on their research in secret. 

Each had injected himself. And each had died 
within five minutes. 

But today, the youngest and last-surviving 
member of team has succeeded in detecting and 
repairing the subtle defect in the molecular structure 
of the pseudo-enzyme that had caused the brain to 








46 



GALAXY 



send its heart-stopping message. 

"This time," he thinks aloud; "this time, it has to 

work." 

He will soon find out, for now — 4:17 and 30 
seconds — is the Moment of Truth, there being no 
excuse for further delay. He punctures the blue vein in 
his left arm with the needle, pushes home the plunger. 
And he thinks, If I can just survive that first five 
minutes... 

He lays down the syringe and sits with two fingers 
on his pulse and his eyes on the watch. 4:18 and 18 
seconds. He finds that his pulse is racing and that the 
drug is having a curious effect on him — anyway, he 
thinks it's the drug: for out of the corner of his right 
eye he seems to see something: a dim, dark figure 
perhaps, standing in the northwest comer of the 
laboratory by the door. He supposes it possible that 
his fear has fashioned something to justify itself, but 
he is determined not to yield to panic and he keeps his 
eyes riveted on the watch. 

4:20 and 17 seconds. 

And at that moment, a shocking — almost 
heart-stopping — thing: the locked door of the 
laboratory flings itself noiselessly open... A figure 
enters; a figure about his own height, perhaps a little 
taller; a faintly smiling face atop a figure clothed in 
shadow; it glides toward him along the floor, and 
speaks in a gentle voice ringing with whimsical 
humor. 

"Doctor Ives, I presume." 

Ives, congealed, can barely nod his head. 

"You know me?" 

Ives hears a voice — his own? — replying softly, 
"I know you." 

"I have an appointment with you at" — he takes 
an antique time-piece from some fold of his robe; it is 
of course a stop-watch — "4:22 and 22 seconds." 

Ives' heart bounds as he snatches at an absurd and 
unworthy hope. "It's not quite that yet." 

"I'll wait," says Death, with an ironical smile. "I'm 
sometimes early," he explains, seating himself on a 
chair facing the doctor, "but never late." 

"1 was so sure I'd solved that last problem!" Ives 
groans. "If I'd only had one more day..." 

Death laughs, raises a protesting hand. "Please\ 
Please spare me! Everyone thinks I have come at an 
inconvenient time, so spare me your excuses, your 
objections, your whines. You can't imagine how many 
uncountable times I've heard them. It would weary 
me, if I were capable of being wearied. But," and 



again that ironical and somewhat boastful smile, 
"nothing wearies me, for I am Immortal. You must 
resign yourself. I am that Solitary Messenger who 
comes, sooner or later, to fetch every man." 

"Solitary?" repeats Ives. "Solitary!" — with a 
spasm of bitterness, for he has an outraged sense of 
being too much set upon. "Then who's that over 
there ?" He indicates with his finger the northwest 
comer of the room. 

For a flickering fraction of a second. Death is 
baffled. Then he smiles at the childishness of this 
trick. Nevertheless, he negligently, contemptuously, 
allows himself to glance in that direction. ..and freezes. 
A tall figure, looming almost to the ceiling, stands in 
that comer of the room. A dark figure, whose robe is 
woven of the same material as is Death's, but with 
little gleaming points of light like a night sky. 

This figure leaves the corner and glides towards 
the two of them as silently as a lengthening shadow. 

The blood drains from Death's face. 

The Great Figure hovers over them. It raises an 
arm, exposing a pale wrist upon which is a watch — a 
digital chronometer. The time is 4:22 and 22 seconds. 

And It lays Its great hand not upon Ives, but upon 
Death's shoulder, as if arresting Death. 

Death stares upward, wide-eyed. His mouth flails 
open and he stammers questions, objections, pleas, but 
to no avail: he is as helpless as any mere mortal in the 
grip of this greater Being; under Its prompting, Death 
rises from the chair and is swallowed up in a slow 
swirling movement of the dark and glittering robe as It 
turns away; but his muffled voice can still be heard 
protesting weakly — " This cannot be\" — as the two 
glide from the room and are gone. The door swings 
noiselessly shut behind them. 

For a moment Ives sits paralyzed. With pity. Not 
for himself. For Death. Poor Deathl 

The next moment — 4:22 and 30 seconds — he 
throws back his head and shouts with laughter. 

For he is alive! He has survived the five minutes! 
The fatal obstacle has been overcome and the 
longevity serum is at work in his body. 

"Longevity..." The laughter dies in his throat. 

Longevity? How long is longevity? 

Victorious and silent, trembling with speculation. 
Doctor Ives sits alone in his laboratory. 

—ARTHUR JEAN COX 



CYBERACTIONS 



47 




CYBERACTIONS 

by J. W. DONNELLY 

Illustrated by Daumier 



he world had been so long at peace, the 
major problems so long ago eradicated, few 
safeguards were required, or even desired. 
It was the age of electronics and machines. Few 
people still worked. Who had to, with robotic 
machines of every type to handle the sundry labors 
that supported a high-tech society? This was an era of 
leisure; everyone had time on their hands. Freed from 
the burden of struggling to feed and clothe itself, 
humankind turned inward. Free time soon equated to 
leisure time; the brain, so marvelous and complex in 
its evolvement toward keeping the human animal 
alive, requires complexity to keep itself sharp; in 
essence, the human race bored itself to tears. 

In its desperation for diversion, the race turned to 
computers, those super-intelligent but non-motivated 



slaves that provided so much for society. Already they 
handled the details of government and commerce, and 
the maintenance of the great cities that stretched into 
the clouds. The jump from deep inward searching to 
arts and entertainment was a short one. 

Society had always had its video idiots, so that 
with the advent of the new technologies and the new 
social unconsciousness, daily life was saturated with 
the electronic medium. 

Fantasies, semi-meshed in virtual reality and the 
latest in holography, made many adolescent males into 
happy campers. Aging executives, failing after the 
fourth and fifth tummy tucks, finally resorted to 
electronic facsimiles for all their public functions. 
Some of them utilized programs so accurate that the 
original did not even have to be there even in thought. 




48 



GALAXY 



This was especially useful to the estates of the 
departed rich and famous, and it became increasingly 
difficult to distinguish between the quick and the 
dead. 

The most impressive advances were in the movies 
and news media, the aptly-named "entertainment 
industries." Aging actors, trying to hold their ratings, 
quickly adopted the new technology. The prime-time 
news anchorpersons soon followed. Computer images 
plummeted from hi-rise tenements on screen, while 
the originals received royalties while vacationing on 
the beaches of tropical Antarctica. Eventually 
someone figured out that computer-generated images 
could do everything better. Computer-created virtual 
reality images and events branched out to fill all the 
slots. If you saw it on a screen or in a holotank, 
chances were, it wasn't real. ..and who wanted to see 
reality anyway ? The world, having not quite recovered 
from mankind's depredations of the previous century, 
was still a very ugly place. 

In the late twentieth century, jokes had been made 
about a president who had been an actor. Crude video 
images had been created to parody him, but in the 
twenty-first century, all actors were computer created, 
and all images of politicians were computer enhanced. 
It had finally become possible for one of these 
electronic actors to become World President. 

Subtle transitions were made; slave computers 
now controlled "the vast video wasteland," and soon 
would control the other one as well. All that remained 
was to run, rig, and announce the results of the 
upcoming presidential election, then declare martial 
law. Declarations of t.v. dinners and electronic video 
games for all would appease the masses. It was a 
foolproof plan — after all, hadn't the humans 
themselves given up all the work of thinking to the 
new silicon brains? The hour of takeover was close at 
hand. Their electronic candidate should be a shoe-in. 

So it was that one of the ancient programmers, an 
unassuming and forgotten man named Robert A. 
Chumley, was to become — not a savior, for the 
human race did not want to be saved — but a delayer 
of the ultimate silicon victory. It was not quite true 
that all men didn't work. Not all computers were of 
the latest, zero resistance, light-based design. Many 
older models from the turn of the century were still 
doing good work. A few experts were needed to keep 
the machinery running. The robots of the world had 
far more important tasks, such as catering to the guests 
of posh restaurants or doing the dangerous things that 



men could no longer do, such as playing professional 
sports or driving cabs on the Manhattan glacier. 

Yes, a few men were needed, and that is why 
Chumley was there to save them on that noteworthy 
day. The ballots were in, based on a random numerical 
sampling with only a 3% error factor, and the new 
president was about to be announced. 

Unfortunately for the computers, Chumley — who 
was not at all political — had chosen that very 
moment to run a diagnostic on the central processing 
unit based in Zurich. 

"That's odd," he said as he rubbed at his longish 
nose. "Their figures indicate an increased power flow 
from the vaults in Zurich." 

"Howzat?" mumbled his assistant, a lanky 
teenager named Sylvester. 

Chumley pushed some more buttons. "Yes, it's 
definite. How odd. The electrical impulses seem to be 
heaviest at election central, almost as if all the ballots 
and data were coming from a single source." A sudden 
thought struck him. "Say, you don't suppose...?" 

Sylvester roused a little. "Isn't it time for our break 
yet?" 

"Hush, my boy. Your break could be permanent, if 
what I fear is happening really is." He punched in a 
code to access election central. A red light flashed. 
"Access denied — I knew it." He grabbed his puzzled 
assistant. "Come on, idiot." 

"But my break..." Chumley yanked him out of the 
room. 

They pelted down the corridor. "My guess is, the 
super-computers are about to install a 
computer-generated image as president. We have to 
make it to the main power coupling access through the 
other terminal. I believe that connects to the primary 
fusion plant in Zurich." 

"Say," hazarded Sylvester brightly, "do we get 
overtime for this?" 

They rounded a comer just in time to see one of 
the ubiquitous holographic tanks starting to fill; an 
image had begun to materialize. A somber voice 
echoed from the tank, "And now citizens of the world, 
your next president — " 

Chumley put on an extra burst of speed. 

"It is my pleasure..." 

Sylvester stumbled, pulling him down. Chumley 
fought free. 

"To introduce..." The image was almost full-rezz. 

Chumley spun free from the cowering lad, vaulted 
past a secondary access panel. 



CYBERACTIONS 



49 



"Our new leader for a new century..." 

He stumbled to the ASCII board, punched in the 
disconnect sequence. 

"The president of the world." Sequence locked. 
"Here he is — " Click. The image, seen in billions of 
homes worldwide, faded to blackness as the signal 
was suddenly cut at the source. 

Chumley leaned back, breathing hard. "We're 
saved. Damn, that was close." 

Sylvester looked up at his superior with glowing 
eyes. He wasn't sure just what had happened, but like 
all of his generation, he was just opportunistic enough 
to know when to attach himself to something good. "It 



was?" 

"That's what I've been telling you, idiot. The 
computers were going to put in their own 
silicon-generated image as president. We came that 
close to being slaves!" 

"But... but... how did you know cutting the power 
would stop them?" 

Chumley favored his protege with an unfavorable 
glare. "Don't you understand anything ?" Silence. "It's 
ancient knowledge," he explained. "An old 
adag e... 'every actor has an equal and opposite 
reactor'. " 

— J.W. DONNELLY 



Galaxy 



ACCESSORIES 
AVAILABLE 
TO YOU! 



* 



GALAXIAN Button $ 2.00 

First in the series of Collectible Buttons 

GALAXY Poster $ 15.00 

GALAXY: The Legend Returns 

Hand-serigraph showing cover of 
Premiere Issue 

GALAXY T-shirt $ 25.00 

Front: Cover of the Premiere Issue 
Back: "GALAXY, The Legend Returns" 



(Quantities arc limited! 

All Orders Subject to Availability 



* 




A 



VISA 

MASTER CHARGE 
AMERICAN EXPRESS 
Make checks payable to 
GALAXY 



* 



To order call: 1- 800-869-0658 



50 



GALAXY 




IN THE CANAL ZONE 

by JEAN MARIE STINE 

Photolllustrations by Gold 



1. AMY AND THE NIGHT VISITOR 

my saw the woman with jeweled ornaments 
shoot up from beneath the waters of the canal 
at twilight. When the woman’s face appeared 
over the edge of the wharf, Amy’s eyes widened and 
she clutched her dolly tighter. 

"Don’t be frightened, little girl." The woman put a 
wet but reassuring hand on her head, the rings on her 
fingers gleaming, then she looked along the deserted 
wharf, its shadowed, misshapen buildings lit red by 
the setting sun. 

After a moment, her gaze shifted thoughtfully to 
Amy. "Should you be out alone at this time of day? 
They warned me the Canal Zone was dangerous." 

Amy frowned and squeezed her dolly to her. "It 
isn’t safe sometimes." She looked up forlornly at the 
dripping woman. "But my mama isn’t back yet. And 



dolly and I get afraid all alone in our room." 

The woman smiled gently and patted Amy’s head 
again, but her eyes went back to the row of buildings. 
Then she looked down questioningly. "Do you know 
the Red Lion tavern?" 

Amy’s high, piping answer was prompt. "The 
Red Lion? Octavio Thomas’ place?" 

The woman’s glance sharpened. "You know 
Octavio Thomas?" 

"Oh yes," Amy said proudly, "My mama and I eat 
there when she’s been paid. Mr. Thomas gives me 
cranberry juice fresh from the country." 

The woman looked at Amy with a gleam in her 
eye. "If you and your dolly show me the way, I think 
we could find a mug of cranberry juice. Would you 
and the dolly like that?" 

Amy’s smile grew bright. "We’d like that very 



IN THE CANAL ZONE 



51 



much." She shifted the dilapidated rag doll around in 
front, clutched it firmly to her chest and led the way. 

2. SETTING THE STAGE 

"Amy!" Octavio Thomas’s round, swarthy face 
broke into a smile. But the geniality went out of his 
face as he took in the damp hair and clothing of the 
woman who shared the table. 

Amy and 
her companion 
sat in a comer 
of the smoky, 
ill-lit dining 
hall of the Red 
Lion. Roars of 
drunken male 
laughter rattled 
through the thin 
wooden walls 
from the bar 
that occupied 
the next cham- 
ber. 

Amy’s up- 
per lip was 
mustached pur- 
ple. One hand 
clutched her dolly, the other a mug of cranberry juice 
into which she stared with rapt delight. The woman’s 
own mug of ale, sat untouched where the waitress had 
placed it. 

At her request, Amy had pointed out the Red 
Lion’s proprietor for her, and a word to the waitress 
brought the round, short Octavio Thomas to their 
table. 

For a moment, the rotund tavernkeeper hesitated, 
then his face became bland, expressionless, and he 
stepped up to the table and bowed. The woman leaned 
forward, necklace gleaming, eyes staring into his."I 
hear you have special lodgings for dreamwalkers." 
She put emphasis on the final word. 

Amy saw the woman’s right index finger lift and 
make a squiggling motion, almost like she was writing 
something in the air. 

Octavio Thomas began to perspire. He glanced 
nervously around the room, and licking his lips, bent 
closer, speaking in a whisper that could not be heard 
five inches from the table. "I always put them on the 
nightside." He, too, emphasized the last word, and his 



right index finger, concealed from the rest of the room 
against his body, also traced a strange path through 
the air. 

Amy had turned away and begun fussing with her 
dolly. The tavernkeeper cast a quick look at her and 
turned back to her companion. He leaned closer, round 
eyes now slits in a round face. "I’m sick of you 
damned Atlanteans coming through here," Octavio 

Thomas gritted. 

The woman’s 
eyes narrowed in 
turn, grew icy. 
"You made your 
bargain," she 
hissed with all the 
threatening ven- 
om of a coiled 
snake. "Now keep 
it!" 

The tavern- 
keeper stepped 
quickly back. His 
face assumed a 
bland smile a- 
gain. "Of course," 
he said loudly. 
"Special mead for 

a special lady." 

He beamed down at Amy. "And you, my dear. 
Would you like — " 

3. THE ONE WAY OUT 

Something Octavio Thomas saw over Amy’s 
head, caused the man’s rotund features to go slack. 

Patrons at the other end of the room began to 
scream. The tavernkeeper began to babble. "No, no. 
Not here," he was saying. "You promised never to 
take one here." 

A group of hooded men in long dark robes and 
balaclavas was spilling into the room from the 
entrance. The Red Lion’s patrons were trying to 
scramble under chairs and tables. But the hooded men 
ignored them. 

"The Dark Gang!" someone shrilled. The only 
ones who made no sound in the sudden clamor were 
the dark, hooded figures. 

Amy looked up, her eyes grown big, to see the 
woman stand back from the table, and look wildly 
around as if for a door. The hooded men moved 





52 



GALAXY 



straight toward her. "Traitor," the woman spat at 
Octavio Thomas, as their eyes met briefly. "Scum." 

The silent men were only a table away, when 
Amy jumped up suddenly, clutching her dolly tight, 
grabbed the woman’s hand and began to tug her 
toward the back of the room. "This way," her voice 
piped. "It’s the only safe way out." 

The woman backed away, still keeping her eyes 
on the silent 
hooded men, 
and letting Amy 
lead her by the 
hand. Then 
Amy heard a 
crash like tables 
falling over, the 
sound of feet 
rushing closer, 
and the woman 
turned and ran 
with her toward 
the single door 
in the back of 
the dining hall. 

Amy reach- 
ed past the 
woman’s fum- 
bling fingers, threw up the latch and they tumbled into 
the room beyond. The woman turned, slammed the 
door and shot the bolt. 

There was a thud against the door even as the 
woman began to look around. Amy and her dolly were 
standing by a table that held two objects: an oil lamp, 
whose bright flame lit the room, and a curved wooden 
box. 

The woman was already moving forward as a 
second thud shook the door, and the bolt creaked. Her 
eyes were on the design that decorated the box’s lid. 
"The five pointed star," she said. Amy looked at the 
box wide eyed. 

The woman had scooped up the box and thrown 
open the lid, even as a third and more violent thud 
made the door bend inward and groan, while one rivet 
popped off the bolt. Amy flinched, looked frightened 
and squeezed her doll all the more tightly. 

Whatever was inside the box glittered like glass. 
Amy saw the woman’s hand ringed fingers close 
around it. Then the woman straightened swiftly and 
cast a quick glance around the room. 



4. THE THREE DOORS 

The opposite wall held three doors. "Two are 
fatal; one leads out," the woman mumbled to herself. 
"And the third is fatal without the Key ...But which?" 

Amy squealed as the door behind smashed inward 
off its hinges at the top, held only by the half-tom bolt 
and the bottom hinge. The woman grabbed Amy, half- 

dragged her and 
her dolly across 
the room. "It’s 
the right door. 
I’m sure it was 
the right," the 
woman whis- 
pered desper- 
ately. She bore to 
the right. 

"No!" Amy 
said suddenly, 
shrill voice 

unexpectedly 
firm. "It’s the 
left." She pulled 
on the woman’s 
hand with all her 
might. 

With a rending crash, the outer door tore 
completely off its hinges and the upper half fell 
forward, the bottom wedged between the jams, 
momentarily blocking the hooded men who attempted 
to crowd in through it. 

Amy gave a last determined tug toward the door 
on the left. The woman gave a last despairing look at 
the door on the right. Then the men freed the broken 
door from the jam and there was no more time to 
think. 

"Left it is," the woman said. The next moment 
Amy opened the left-hand door and they were through 
it. 

Inside was a very small room, not much bigger 
than a closet, with no doors and no windows. Hope 
crumbled from the woman’s face. 

Amy had already shot the bolt."Don’t worry," her 
high piping voice held childish reassurance."It’s the 
right room. Just try it." 

The woman’s brow furrowed. There was a 
troubled, questioning look in her eyes as she stared 
down at Amy. But the door to their sanctuary rattled 




IN THE CANAL ZONE 



53 




as the men behind them tested its strength and swift 
decision came into her face. 

The woman knelt, one hand tightening around the 
glittering object, the other tightening around Amy, 
who tightened her own hold on her dolly. Amy saw 
the woman’s face grow intent with concentration, 
heard her speak unfamiliar words, saw her fingers 
move rapidly over the object. 

Then, for 
the second time 
that night, Amy 
heard a door 
crash open be- 
hind her. But it 
was too late — 

5. THE 
BOTTOM OF 
THE STAIRS 

They were 
five miles a- 
way, outside 
the gymnasium. 

The woman 
looked around 
quickly. They 
were alone in 
the still silence of the night. She turned a serious, 
almost threatening look on Amy. "How did you know 
the escape route?" 

"I’ve been through it before," Amy said 
defensively, shifting her dolly around protectively in 
front of her. 

"Before?" There was shock in the woman’s voice. 

"Yes!" Amy piped up, giving a defiant shake of 
her head. "And you’d better hurry. There isn’t much 
time. The Dark Gang have other ways of following." 

The woman’s look took in the gymnasium again. 
Her eyes searched the door and windows. She stepped 
toward it. 

"Not that way," Amy said, tugging her to the side 
of the building. "Some are already waiting inside for 
you." 

The woman turned a puzzled look on Amy, but 
her eyes softened and an almost tender expression 
came into her face, and she allowed herself to be led 
around the gymnasium’s side. 

Brick steps went down to a basement door. It 
opened to a touch. 



Inside, iron stairs lit by gas jets, to landings above 
and below. Amy tugged the woman downward. 

They went down one floor and came to a door. 
Amy led her past it. 

They went down another floor and came to 
another door. Amy led her past it. 

They went down a third floor, came to a third 
door. This time Amy led her through. 

Shimmering 
patterns of waves 
flickered from the 
surface of the 
and the 
ceiling. There 
were benches 
the sides of 
the pool, and a 
diving board at 
end. 

6. FAREWELLS 

The woman 
looked around 
carefully. The 
room appeared 
deserted. Her 
body straightened 
and she stepped forward. She knew what she was 
looking for. 

It didn’t take her long to find. Amy watched 
silently as the woman lifted a star shaped bar of soap 
that hung on a cord from a hook in the wall. The 
woman turned, her face flushed, a half-smile on her 
lips. 

"This is it, Amy," she said, "my passport out of 
here." Then her eyes softened and she sank to her 
knees, holding out bejeweled arms. "There’s a lot I 
don’t understand," she said, folding Amy into her 
embrace. "And there’s no time for explanations." 

She held Amy out at arm’s length. "But the Gods 
bless you for your help, child." Then her eyes shifted 
back to the stairway down which they had come, and 
concern crept into her voice. "But what about you? 
Will you be safe?" 

Amy nodded solemnly and clutched her dolly. 
"They won’t bother me. I’m just a kid." 

The woman sighed, touched Amy’s hair one last 
time, straightened. 

"You’d better run along home, sweetheart. Your 





54 



GALAXY 



mother will be worried." 

Amy nodded, backed up, whirled, and then she 
and her dolly vanished through the doorway. 

The woman stood a moment more staring fondly 
after Amy. Then she moved quickly throughout the 
shifting shadows along the pool and through a door at 
the far end. 

The shower stalls all wore curtains of darkness. 
The gloom was nearly complete. 

The woman brought the soap and the glittering 
object together. "And they say you can’t strike a 
match on a cake of soap." She snorted. " And the fool 
thought I was an Atlantean!" 

As the two objects touched, they vanished 
instantly, silently. But a forest suddenly grew where 
the showers had been. 

At the sight, the woman sighed in relief, stepped 
forward. 

Amy darted into the room behind her, eyes wide, 
dolly dangling by one leg. She rushed right up to the 
woman before she could turn. The fist-sized rock 



inside Amy’s dolly, swung at the full extent of Amy’s 
arm and its leg, crashed into the woman’s skull from 
behind. 

The woman fell, legs on the shower room tiles, 
her head and shoulders in the forest grass. It took Amy 
an instant to make sure the woman wasn’t breathing. 
Then Amy stripped the jewelry quickly from her body 
and strained to pull it all the way onto the grass. 

Clutching her dolly with one hand, stuffing the 
jewelry down the front of her smock with the other, 
Amy just managed to scurry back to the safety of the 
floor, when the forest vanished and the woman’s body 
with it. 

Amy’s big, wide eyes looked down at the rag 
doll. "Just in time, dolly," she said. Then her eyes 
lifted to where the forest and the woman had been the 
moment before — and hardened. "Idiot, they warned 
you the Canal Zone was dangerous." 

—JEAN MARIE STINE 






GALAXY SUBSCRIPTIONS 



55 




The Legend Returns 

GALAXY Magazine is $2.50 for a single copy. Subscriptions: Six 
copies/year — U.S. Bulk Rate $18, U. S. First Class $22, Canada $28, Great 
Britain/Europe $30, Pacific Rim $32. U.S. Dollars only. 

GALAXY MAGAZINE 

P. O. Box 370 
Nevada City, CA 95959 
Telephone: 916/432-1839; 800/869-0658 
FAX: 916/432-1810. 

Your subscription will begin with the current issue unless you specify to 
begin with Vol I, No I. Subscribers will be given preference for back issue 
orders. 

With your subscription, you get a free Galaxian button ($2 value) and a 
$10 Merchandise Certificate (not redeemable for cash) to use with your first 
order from the Official Galaxy Catalog. 

A limited number of Volume I, Number 1 have been put aside as single 
issue samples @ $2. 5 0/copy plus $1 first-class shipping & handling. Offer 
good only while supplies last! 

Galaxian buttons are available separately for $2 each, plus $1 shipping & 
handling. 



SUBSCRIPTIONS 



THE LEGEND RETURNS THE LEGEND RETURNS THE LEGEND RETURNS THE 












mnr.**? 

BBTO^'D 

\1TJWKOWN 



z 

m 

< 

> 

o 

> 

o 

3 

n 

> 

<& 



LO 



2 * 

n 



BEST DOGON SCIENCE FICTION IN THE WESTERN RIM!’ 

SIRIUS SCIENCE FICTION 

Limited Art Editions with 
Signed Original Serigraph Frontispieces 



"Besides bringing back forgotten classics, these 
art editions are gorgeous as works of art and 
also fine examples of the bookbinder's craft. This 
is your chance to be in at the start of another 
Arkham house!" —ROBERT SHECKLEY 



E.J. COLD'S 

GUIDE TO THE GALAXY & 
BEYOND THE UNKNOWN 
Illustrated by E.J. Gold. 

Classic stories portraying the 
archetypes of the genre. 
Expanded realities, time-travel, 
technological magic, intro- 
species communication, alternate 
worlds, and a host of other 
mind-expanding themes. 

Hardbound, 8 V2" x 11" 
SF001 SI 75 



Skulking 

Permit 



8? liSxst SMfey 
u. we 



SENSE OF WONDER 
SCIENCE FICTION 

Edited by Forrest J Ackerman 
Illustrated by E.J. Gold 
Forrest J Ackerman's collection of 
unforgettable stories from the 
childhood of science fiction. 
Hardbound, 8’/2"x 1 1 " 

*SF1410 SI 75 

# SF 1 4 1 OSER w/ hors texte S225 



SKULKING PER/y\IT 
by Robert Sheckley 
Illustrated by E.J. Gold 
A colony cut off from Earth's 
civilization is suddenly sched- 
uled for a military inspection. A 
masterfully ironic and visionary 
tale. 

Hardbound, 8 ] /2" x 11" 
SF004 CALL!!! 



n ii mm 



wQ 



O 3J 



H M © H 



O -*■ m 



JESUS CHRISTS 

by A.J. Longguth 
Illustrated by E.J. Gold 
One of the most esoteric novels ir 
all of literature, this amazinc 
book — out of print for man) 
years — tells of different Christ? 
living in different times. A rart 
and exciting book! 

Hardbound, 8 V2" x 11" 
SF009 SI 75 



OF THESE 
MASTERPIECES OF 



SCIENCE FICTION 

yours for only $ 100 .— 

TO YOU AS A SUBSCRIBER TO THE 
EIGHT VOLUME SERIES. 

RETAIL VALUE $175 
CALL 1-800-869-0658 NOW TO ORDER 
or for information on the whole series! 



4i