“Seven Soup 
Rivers” 

by 

ROBERT 

SHECKLEY 

SANDY 

SAIDAK 

WILLIAM F. 

WU 

BARBARA 

JOHNSON-HADDAD 

JACK 

NIMERSHEIM 

CHARLEE 

JACOB 

ROBERT 

SILVERBERG 

SARAH 

ZETTEL 

FRANK 

HERBERT 

JACQUELINE F. 
FALKENHAN 

GORDON R. 
DICKSON 

RICHARD 

CURTIS 

E. JAY 
O’CONNELL 

ROBERT E. 
ROGOFF 

JEAN MARIE 
STINE 

BJO 

TRIMBLE 



COVER ART 

for “Seven Soup Rivers” 
©1994 VINCENT Dl FATE 




2 



GALAXY 



DARE TO BE A WOMAN 




JAL 7708 

UR STYLE 

8-corner ancient Carnelian 
c. 2500 B.C., Chinese 
Turquoise tubes and rondels, 
Hand-crafted in Sri Lanka 
granulated Sterling Silver 
cage beads, on Sterling Silver 
wire links. Limited Edition. 

$750 



Jewels 

of 

Ancient Lands 



Quality 
Resonance 
Empowerment ... 

CoCor combinations, 
materials, patterns, all 
contribute to make 
Jewels of Ancient Lands' 
necklaces rare, sought-after 
creations which will last for 
generations. 




Jewels of Ancient Lands 

P.O. Box 370, Nevada City, CA 95959 
for information caff 1-800-869-0658 or 916-432-1839 



ADVERTISEMENT 



3 





b. The children have a magic door in the corner of their room. 
But they grow up remembering a little of those childhood voy- 
ages, thinking only that it would be wonderful if it were really 
possible to return there. 

It is possible. 



/. The ancients used many assisting factors, including herbal 
substances, sacred spaces, miniatures, chanting, drumming, and 
other tools in order to reach and work in these other worlds. 

But they didn't have the tank. 



•J.Our activities, tasks, habits, jobs and responsibili- 
ties all conspire together to make us forget that there is 
much, much more to life. Here is freedom. 



i . lime ana space - two ways or looKing at me 
same continuum. View one and the other is open 
and available to you at the same moment. Altered 
space equals altered time. 



The Samadhi Floatation Tank is a way into 
other spaces and other times. 



Samadhi Tank Company 
PO Box 2119 
Nevada City CA 95959 
For more information 
call (916) 477-1319 
1 -800-869-0658 



6. The tank is a safe and effective time altering 
mechanism. It is not guaranteed that you will return 
to the same world, and that's part of the adventure. 
The tank is a doorway. The tank is a time machine. 



space shipsamadhi 

the original floatation tank J 



4. But you will know that it is your conscious- 
ness that empowers time and space, concealed 
by an ordinary piece of furniture in your living 
or bedroom. 



2 . It's the doorway in the back of the closet; the 
opening in the trees that leads into other worlds. 



3 . There it sits, a truly innocuous time 
machine, taking up only a few square 
feet in your home, that you can climb 
into and go anywhere 



9. It's the only way to get out 
of this world alive. 




4 



GALAXY 





BW10150 
Coffee Pot 
$150 

BW11250 

Creamer 

$140 



All products guaranteed. 
Your money refunded If you're 
not completely satisfied. 




BW31351 Salt, Pepper and 

Cheese Shaker 

$225 




BG41001 
Large Bowl, 

14" diameter $250 



ORDER FROM OUR CATALOG! 

IT'S EASY 

EASY: FILL OUT ORDER FORM AND MAIL IT TO US WITH YOUR 
CHECK. CALL FOR SHIPPING CHARGES. 

EASIER: FILL OUT ORDER FORM ON PAGE 90 & FAX IT TO US. 
EASIEST: ORDER BY PHONE - PAY WITH YOUR CREDIT CARD. 
ORDER LINE: 1-800-869-0658 / 916-432-1716 
FAX LINE: 916-432-1810 
MAILING ADDRESS: P.O. BOX 370 
NEVADA CITY, CA 95959 




ADVERTISEMENT 



5 




We're very proud of 
these ceramic pieces. In 
look, feel and presence, 
they are truly exquisite. 
We think you'll agree with 
us - but in the unlikely 
event that you don't, we 
guarantee your satisfac- 
tion - your money will be 
refunded in full. 



imagine their delight... 



Endless Circle Teapots 



PHI, Necklace 
Hand-forged silver 
Hand-made ceramic beads 
$249 



BD05101 

Oval serving platter 
14" long $225 



Lei earthen works 



1-800-869-0658 or 916-432-1716 
PO Box 370 Nevada City CA 95959 



CP31006 7" Egg Box $125 



DG20645 
17" Umbrella Stand 

$350 



DG20546 11" Pitcher 
$225 



EC05001 Endless Circle Teapot and 
cups. Specify one color: Blue, Brown, 
Yellow. Ped & Green not shown 

$275 



6 



GALAXY 




DWy- yArht, A -f yAtgX. 

Ufa AyJ. A fwpO+jJL 

fatouf 

rhA^iCAl ftWVyu 
f\uA*&Attt V R<-ayAl 
f>hu, TeAl, 

Pw^it, AyU QtAck. 



Miracle Dragon: $95 

shipping included. 
California residents 
please add $6.90 tax. 
Send check or M.O. to 



FACETS 






PO BOX 443 
Penn Valley, CA 95946 
1-800-887-8536 
(916) 432-9278 
Allow 4-6 weeks 
for delivery. 



MIRACLE 

PUPPETS 

\rj Af+dyh&Ae. 
\/z£[/&Ue4* 

A i/A^iety. 



ADVERTISEMENT 



7 




Art & Graphics Editioris Lirfiited 



"Martha C iraham" 

City in the^Sky, Cobblestone 1 
"A Small Pond" . 

T , "The Hetmk" % 

K 'L £ '■ 'A A' : " 

1’UCC.S m ailable on revest*: ' 

y ..p*. — ,r — 

'152 Mill Street, Suite Ej , 
Grass Valley CA 95945 
Call (916) 275-1725 EXT A 

• ;■ * • j. *> *• ' 



ZePm DRUM COMPANY 



Say - 

What if you found yourself 
in an eternal chamber, and 
could only have one drum 
in there with you, what kind 
would it be? 



A 2EPWR, of course - 



Zephyr Drum Company 
P.O. Box 22693, 
Santa Fe, NM, 87502-2693 
Tel: (800) 488-3402 
Fax: (505) 983-401 1 



Glazed ceramic drums (I to r): Inanna $125, Amber 

$90, Nasrudin $ 1 50, Darius $ 1 25 Tve had mine forever. " - The Absolute 



MODELING - CRAFTS 



FICTION - SCIENCE OF DYING 

Sample Issue $2.25 
PO Box 370 Nevada City CA 95959 
Call 1-800-869-0658 or (916) 432-1716 



The Truly Empowered Woman 



Creates Her Own Damn Universe. 

READ 

CREATOR 



8 



GALAXY 





Ceramic 
Care Bears 

but not so fuzzy 



Sweet Medicine Bear Studio 
P.O. Box 22693 
Santa Fe, NM, 87502-2693 
Tel: (800) 488-3402 
Fax: (505) 983-401 1 



Buy These 



You'll love them 



SENSE OF WONDER HOBBIES. 

1-800-869-0658 OR 916-432-1716 



KITS START AT $44 
INSTRUCTION: CALL 
FOR MORE INFORMA- 
TION, PRICES AND 
AVAI LABLITY 



THE ROBOTS ARE NOT COMING. THEY ARE HERE. 



AND THEY'RE NOT 
PROGRAMMED WITH 
ASIMOV'S LAWS. 
FORTUNATELY, 
THEY'RE SMALL 
ENOUGH TO ORDER 
AROUND. 







Editorial 

Seven Soup Rivers 

Support Unlimited 

Midnight Pearls Blue 

The Greatest Loss 

Thoroughly Modern Magic . 

This Space for Rent 

MUgwump Four 

The Temptation of Harringay 

Old Rambling House 

Songs of the Soul 

Lulungomeena 

The Client from Hell 

Just Rubberface and Me 

Coke Bottle Lenses 

The Dead-End 

My Life Among the Stars . 
For Your Information 



E. J. Gold 11 

Robert Sheckley 12 

Sandy Saidak 25 

William F. Wu 28 

Barbara Johnson-Haddad 30 

JackNimersheim 31 

Charlee Jacob 34 

Robert Silverberg 38 

Sarah Zettel 46 

Frank Herbert 48 

Jacqueline F. Falkenhan . 52 

Gordon R. Dickson 60 

Richard Curtis 68 

E. Jay O’Connell 72 

Robert E. Rogoff 78 

Jean Marie Stine 80 

Bjo Trimble 81 

Claude Needham 83 



ARTISTS 

Claude Needham, Heather Valencia, Lin Larsen, Zod, Tim Elston, Richard Hart, Vincent Di Fate, 
Stephanie Boyd, Seth Gold, Della Heywood, Kelly Rivera, Tom X, Tim Courtney, Frank Kelly Freas, 

Virgil Finlay 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

“Midnight Pearls Blue” © 1985 Associates International, Inc., “MUgwump Four” ©1959 Robert 
Silverberg, “Old Rambling House” © 1958 Frank Herbert, “Lulungomeena” ©1954 Gordon R. Dickson 

SPECIAL THANKS to Media Zap Advertising and Scanners Proofreading. 



EDITORIAL STAFF 

E. J. GOLD, Fiction Editor DAVID FRANCO, Publisher 

CLAUDE NEEDHAM, Science Editor TABATHA JONES, Managing Editor 

HORACE L. GOLD, Contributing Editor JEAN MARIE STINE, Contributing Editor 

FORREST J ACKERMAN, Contributing Editor ANN-VICTORIA HOPCROFT, Production Manager 

LINDA CORRIVEAU, Computer Graphics BARBARA HAYNES, Art Director 

MORGAN FOX AGENCY, Advertising Director 



GALAXY MAGAZINE is published bi-monthly by the Institute for the Development of the Harmonious Human Being, Inc., a 
California not-for-profit corporation. Main Office: 1 1394 Pleasant Valley Road, Penn Valley, California 95946. Mailing Address: 
GALAXY Magazine, P. O. Box 370, Nevada City, CA 95959. Telephone 916/432-1839, FAX 916/432-1810. SINGLE COPY $2.50 
U.S., $3.50 CANADA. SUBSCRIPTIONS: 6 copies/year. U.S. Bulk Rate $18, U.S. First Class $22, Canada $28, Great 

Britain/Europe $30, Pacific Rim $32. U.S. Dollars Only. © 1994 IDHHB, Inc. All rights, including translations, reserved. ISSN # 
1073-4422. All stories printed in this magazine are fiction and/or satire, and any similarity between characters and actual persons is 
coincidental. Authors and artists retain copyright of their works. All offers set forth in this magazine are subject to change without 
notice, but what isn’t? PRINTED IN U.S.A. 



1U 



GALAXY 



Jewels oj Ancient lands 



TREASURES FOR THE DISCERNING . 

imaginative, tasteful, bold . 

FOR COLLECTORS WHO APPRECIATE TREASURES FROM THE 
PAST WHEN WOMEN'S POWERS REIGNED SUPREME 




Ancient Tibetan 



Carved Amethyst football and thick flat ovals, 
Turquoise barrels, Coral rounds. Hematite rounds, 
Sri Lanka rondels 
JAL 4025 - $ 499 



Jewels of Ancient Lands necklaces. 

Rare, sought-after creations which will last for generations. 

WE KNOW BECAUSE 

WE MADE THE ORIGINALS 

jot infiotmAtlon call 1-800-869-0658 









EDITORIAL 



11 




EDITORIAL 

By E.J. GOLD 

Illustrated by Freas 

he subways were full of people. Everybody knew 
that. But not everybody — even New Yorkers — 
knew that there were people living in the 
subways. 

Ever since any kind of shelter against weather 
existed, humans have always used them. It’s your basic 
exploitative species looking for a place to hang its hat. 

Personal shelters aren’t new; there’s always been a 
bivy tent in one form or another, and yurts have been 
around an awfully long time. 

Beowulf and friends consorted together in a sort of 
pelt-festooned wooden barn; that’s been a fairly common 
form of shelter since neolithic times, and little has 
changed, if you’ve seen one of the Chicago housing 
projects lately. 

The mead’s gotten somewhat more predictable, but 
that hardly passes for “better.” 

But the people who live in the subway tunnels don’t 
generally drink mead. 

You can eat a lot of food for a quarter at some of 
those cheap standup joints around Times Square. You 
get to actually develop preferences for one brand of 
ketchup soup over another; one cheap bright yellow 
mustard might catch your fancy, and another — too 
skimpy with the petroleum byproducts — leave you 
unimpressed. 

Beer and wine are never a problem, if you don’t care 
who drank it first. Like the prison industry (for those 
tourists just entering the real world for the first time, 



that’s an environment provided by the government for 
the use of the underworld in the recruitment of enforcers, 
drug and numbers runners, pimps and prostitutes, and so 
forth, as well as a safe place from which to run all those 
public-service enterprises) there’s never a lack of sex 
and drugs on the street. 

That’s how come the subway people are the only 
ones who aren’t connected to the Wall Street crowd (the 
ones who carelessly throw over their shoulders that 
cocaine is their drug-of-choice). 

The Wall Street cocainists (perhaps that’s at least 
one of the reasons for all those bond scandals?) aren’t 
the only ones to whom the subway dwellers are not 
connected. 

Ordinarily, one could draw lines of connection, you 
see, like some sort of James Joyce storyline, between all 
elements of the social web. But that’s just it. The subway 
dwellers are not part of the social web. 

They’re not like hoboes, gentlepersons of the road. 
Even hoboes had their impact on society, and it upon 
them. But not so the subway people. They neither 
participate nor draw upon our society in any way. 

They don’t even use our garbage, our throwaways. 

What do they eat? Don’t ask. 

What do they wear? You don’t want to know. 

Where do they sleep? Who has the nerve to sleep 
down there? 

What do they do all day? 

I was hoping you would tell me. Word length, 5,000 
to 10,000 at the usual rates. Don’t mention this to anyone 
else. I wouldn’t want to see two manuscripts with the 
same plotline. 

— E. J. GOLD 




12 



GALAXY 




' *■ ' y'y w'Cfrjv 








■ JMK 




1 1 






Wi 



SEVEN SOUP RIVERS 

By ROBERT SHECKLEY 

Illustrated by Di Fate 

here were two doors, and at first I thought I 
would go through the one on the right, for no 
special reason, just because you have to pick one 
if you are to go through at all, and the two doors seemed 
to me equal in appeal and promise. But as I approached 
them, and as the angle of perspective changed, I noticed 
a third door, previously concealed behind the curving 
wall in which the doors were set, and this door was to the 
right of my original choice, making my choice now the 
center door. 

This third door, appearing so suddenly, disturbed 
me. I was feeling out of sorts anyhow. It had been a long 
and tedious trip since leaving Colomb, after the ill-fated 
affair with Morth. The signs I had encountered along the 
way had been ambiguous; you never understand what 
anything means until it’s too late to do anything about it. 
And my knapsack was heavy, filled with necessities of 
the journey, as well as a dozen or more things I would 
probably never need but could not easily procure 
elsewhere should they prove necessary. 

When you travel, you pack your whole life in 
miniature into your knapsack, not just what you really 
need — for who can know for sure what that is? — but 



what you might need, or hope to need, or fear you will 
need. No wonder the straps bit into my shoulders from 
the sagging weight on my back. 

And Glynnis’ clever pointy little machine, which I 
had included at the last minute, had worked itself free of 
its padding and was digging me just above the hip. But I 
didn’t want to stop and rearrange the load now — not 
with the entrance to Phocis just ahead of me, behind one 
of the three doors. 

Coming up to the doors now, I looked and didn’t 
much like what I saw. There seemed no difference in the 
two doors. Perhaps it wouldn’t matter which I went 
through. Did it matter? I remembered Sicelle’s advice: 
Beware the obvious! I had nodded sagely at the time, but 
now that I thought about it I realized it wasn’t so easy to 
tell what the obvious was, or, having discovered it, to 
avoid its allure. My decision to walk boldly through the 
center door began to waver, and I cursed the irresolute 
quality of mind that made me think and think again 
whenever a choice had to be made. Something like this 
had occurred during my brief time with Morth, and I had 
sworn to learn from it. But what bearing did that have on 
the three doors? 

I suppose I could have spent quite a long time in that 
dilemma, standing irresolutely in front of the three doors, 
backpack pulling on my shoulders, Glyn’s little machine 
digging into my hip, my stomach making feed-me 




SEVEN SOUP RIVERS 



13 




a 






in 

T|al 


; . -v?: 






is 






Hr ■ 1 - JlM 


/ . 



noises. Perhaps it was hunger that decided me. Some 
primitive part of my brain knew unequivocally that it 
would never get fed as long as I hesitated here on the 
threshold to Phocis. So I lunged toward the center door, 
deviating at the last moment for no apparent reason to 
pass through the leftmost door. 

The first thing I saw after passing through were the 
flamingoes. There were three of them, white and pink 
balls of feathers with long, skinny backward-hinged legs 
beneath, and long snakelike necks with flat small heads 
and curved black beaks below. Two of them were 
engaged in what I supposed was a standard sort of bird 
repartee, or perhaps a mating dance, squawking noisily 
at each other and darting their heads like duelists. The 
third bird, somewhat larger and colored a deeper orange, 
paid no attention to any of this. He was holding his head 
upside down on the surface of the shallow water in 
which they were all standing, and he was making some 
kind of vibrating motion that sent out little ripples. I 
thought perhaps he was stirring up little creatures in the 
water, but I didn’t see him feed. 

A thousand thoughts crowded my mind, one more 
bizarre than the next, and I might have retreated back 
through the door if it had still been there. Of course it 
was not. These are one-way doors into Phocis, and you 
have to go through a complex and tedious procedure to 
find an exit. 

I was a long way from wanting to leave, since I had 



hardly arrived. I looked at the flamingoes again and in a 
moment the most probable explanation occurred to me: 
that this was a decorative aviary, of a sort that is used to 
enhance public spaces, and that the reason I had entered 
into the middle of it was due to my choosing the wrong 
door after all, for I seemed to have taken a service door 
that had brought me into the middle of the aviary. I had 
made a mistake, but not a serious one, I thought, because 
a few steps took me out of the birds’ vicinity (with my 
feet wet, of course) and onto the path that led to the 
interior of the reception area. 

As I recovered the correct path I looked around 
hastily to see if anyone had noticed my faux-pas, not that 
I was afraid of punishment, but simply because one hates 
to make a fool of oneself when entering a new place. But 
there didn’t seem to be anyone in my vicinity, just a long 
curving corridor with recessed lighting. 

And then there was a sound of music, bagpipes and 
drum, and down the corridor came a group of people in 
brightly striped costumes of black, red and green. One 
had a bagpipe, another a snare drum, and the others, to 
judge by the lightness and grace of their movements, 
were dancers. They were performing some sort of a 
circle dance, while all the time taking little skipping 
sidesteps that carried them down the corridor toward me. 
There were two men and two women dancers, and the 
men carried tambourines, while the women clicked away 
with castanets. 



14 



GALAXY 



I moved back to let them pass and the wall receded 
behind me and dissolved, and I found myself in a large 
open area without visible barriers, open to the sky or its 
simulation. There was reddish earth under my feet, 
pounded to a dry, hard consistency. Several trees with 
spreading limbs and dusty greenish-brown foliage stood 
in the middle distance, and far away I could see a low 
jagged line of slate-blue mountains. I scarcely had time 
to remark to myself on the speed and precision of the 
simulation, when a large group of people entered from 
wherever it was they came from. They were darkskinned, 
and some wore leopardskin wraparound garments, while 
others were in shiny suits reminiscent of a previous age. 

The dancers had already begun their performance, 
and the newcomers looked at them in some amazement 
but without, I thought, much interest. From off to one 
side I could hear a further dull pounding noise, drums, I 
supposed, and some twittering flutelike instruments. 

And then Llew was standing beside me. He had 
come up so suddenly I hadn’t seem him approach. He 
was wearing an intensely patterned sports shirt and beige 
sharply creased slacks, and he had tasseled loafers on his 
small feet which I remembered now he was inordinately 
vain about. 

“Well, come on,” he said, “are you going to stand 
here gawking all day at the wedding party? I don’t 
believe you were invited, unless you have connections 
you never told me about. For your information, that’s the 
king of the Saloops, a purely hereditary post, no real 
power, and the fat man beside him talking in a rather 
vehement manner is his prime minister or whatever they 
call him in their own language. Kas-Desair, I think it is, I 
used to speak a bit of Gheul when I had the trading post 
on the Orimba. I told you about that, didn’t I? Never 
mind, a few of the young men are coming your way. I 
think it’s time to smile politely, make a cross with your 
arms over your head to show friendliness, and get the 
hell out of here.” 

“What about you?” I asked. 

“They’re not likely to object to me,” Llew said. “I’m 
not really here at all; what you see is an interprojection. 
Nothing much they can do about me except call the 
Comptroller of Privacy and tell him there’s a peeper in 
their midst.” 

Now that he mentioned it, I did notice the faint 
glimmer to Llew’s appearance. At first I had thought it 
was just a trick of the light, but now I realized that of 
course he was communicating with me by interpro. 

The two men approaching from the wedding party 
were very tall and strongly made. They were scowling, 
and they carried carved clubs with big knots on the end 
that looked like they could give quite a crack. 

“How do I get out of here?” I asked Llew. 

“Follow me,” Llew said. “We’ll double back around 
the flamingoes.” 

I turned hastily and followed as he glided up the 
path, around the flamingoes still doing their mating ritual 



or whatever it was, through the shallow water again, and 
then through an abrupt little dogleg of a turn. 

At first there was little to see; these exhibits usually 
have a fair amount of spatial extension, and so I was 
splashing through the water for entire minutes, with 
Llew, or rather his interpro projection, floating along 
beside me, very lifelike except that of course his feet 
weren’t getting wet. After a while we came to the end of 
the exhibit and moved abruptly into utter blackness. 
They do that in the in-between bits to save energy, 
except for the glowing yellow line at your feet which 
guides you to the next open station. 

Llew was chatting about some of our mutual friends, 
Laure and Dagon, who had recently made a one year 
affiliation; and Mauritia, who had taken a job at the 
Offworlds Agency, but was having trouble getting her 
documentation together. 

I hoped for the best for Laure, whom I hadn’t seen in 
some years, not since that summer in Green Island, back 
before the Trippies took it over and turned it into a rest 
home for followers of the New Gnosis. It was a pity, 
really, because places like Green Island don’t come up 
every day or year, places where nature catches ahold, so 
to speak, gets it right, and there is a miraculous balance 
between the force-implanted flora and the various 
physical aspects of the island. It’s very impractical, of 
course, setting up such a place, and usually it happens 
quite by accident. 

I had met Llew originally at Green Island, where he 
had been studying psychopainting and getting drunk 
every night, but in a refined way that was not obnoxious. 
What fun we had that summer! But that was then and 
now was now. Now I had the affair of Phocis to consider, 
and I was wondering already how matters would go for 
me here. 

Taking the big step and going to Phocis was no small 
matter. My reasons for coming here, which had seemed 
so sound when I left Earth, were beginning to seem to 
me vague in the extreme, and unfounded in reality. 
Already I had Glynnis’ little machine, which seemed 
almost to have a mind of its own. 

I had to face it: I must have made the mistake of 
coming in the wrong door. If I had selected the right one, 
whichever that one was, I wouldn’t be stumbling along 
in darkness now, in the network that linked together the 
exhibits, following a thin glowing yellow line which 
stretched on interminably into the impenetrable black. 
And of course I was still carrying the heavy knapsack, 
and I had not had a chance to readjust the position of its 
own. I was pondering these matters when there was a 
crystalline tinkle of bells in the air, an automatic signal 
set off by my approach, presaging an event of some sort 
about to happen. The Phocians are clever about that sort 
of thing, warning you in advance of an impending 
situation, though of course they don’t tell you just what it 
will be. 

“What do you suppose it is this time?” I asked Llew. 



SEVEN SOUP RIVERS 



15 



There was no reply. I looked around, turning in a 
complete circle. Llew wasn’t there any more. 
Interruptions in intrabeam projection are fairly common, 
so I wasn’t worried, although it had come at an 
inconvenient time. Continuing my advance, I saw that 
the yellow line had changed into a squiggle, and that it 
was crossed by red and green lines. What the Phocians 
rather grandly call a conturbation of cross purposes. 

Well, I had been expecting something like that, and 
so I continued to advance with at least the outward signs 
of confidence; until once again the lights came up and I 
was set forth into another scene. 

This one was not immediately familiar. I seemed to 
have gotten myself into a dark little room, made of 
roughly dressed rock, with a ceiling not much above my 
own height. There was a plain wooden bed against one 
wall, a table and chair. There was a little partition, waist 
high, and behind it I saw a man in a blue and red 
uniform, some sort of soldier’s outfit, carrying what 
looked like an ancient musket. His hair was dark and 
long and gathered in back in a little ponytail. He was 
smoking a clay pipe, which he put down when he noticed 
me. 

“Good morning, citizen,” he said. “I am glad you 
have awakened. Your breakfast is under the napkin, on 
that plate on the little table. There is a Bible nearby for 
your morning devotions. An examiner will come speak 
to you presently. I am required to say these things to you 
to provide basic orientation, so you will not say this was 
omitted when the time of your judgement comes. I am 
not allowed further discourse. So if it is all perfectly 
clear, I will return to my newspaper.” 

“Wait a minute,” I said, “nothing is clear at all. 
Where am I? What is this place? This appears to be a cell 
of some sort, is that correct? If so, what am I accused 
of?” 

“Citizen,” he said, “these are not matters for me to 
discuss with you. Save it all for the examiner.” 

“Just tell me what I’m doing here.” 

The guard stood up. He was a tall man, strongly 
made, and his face was rough and not friendly. 

“I have done my duty,” he said. “You will not 
require more of me. If you will not shut up, I will shut 
you up with this.” He brandished his musket like a club. 
“They will say I was within my rights if I knock you out 
to prevent further illegal interrogation.” 

His manner had changed to one of overt threat. I 
didn’t reply to him, for he looked ready to use his 
weapon. This was ridiculous, of course, and clearly the 
result of some misunderstanding. But it seemed I would 
risk a crack over the skull if I persisted in trying to clear 
it up now. I turned away from him and sat down on the 
chair and picked up the Bible. He watched me for a 
moment, then took a seat again and picked up his 
newspaper. In a moment he had his pipe going and 
seemed contented. 

I was a long way from content, but what was I to do? 
The fellow’s hostility had been so evident, and had come 



on so quickly, that I thought it best not to provoke him. I 
leafed through the pages of the Bible. It was written in a 
language I did not understand. Even the alphabet was 
unfamiliar to me, so I could take no comfort even from 
mumbling the words. I put it down and eased the 
knapsack off my shoulders, glancing at the guard as I did 
so. He didn’t look up from his newspaper. Apparently 
this action, at least, was not forbidden. 

Opening the knapsack, I rummaged around for 
something to read. I badly needed to calm my nerves, for 
this was an uncanny situation. 

1 And where in hell was Llew? Surely he had had time 
to restore service to his projection by now? But Llew 
was nowhere around, and, looking around the cell, I 
could see no communication devices, unless they were 
concealed in the dim painting on the wall, which showed 
men and women in old-fashioned clothing taking a 
picnic in some idealized forest clearing. I wished I could 
join them. 

Again, keeping an eye on the guard, I stood up to 
examine the painting more closely. It seemed to draw me 
closer by some inherent magnetism. I studied it 
carefully. The bushes it portrayed looked artificial. Was 
that intentional? While I studied it, I could hear the 
sound of footsteps coming down from the corridor 
outside. 

The forest proved no real refuge. Once I was 
irrevocably within it, I saw it was an ominous place, full 
of toadstools and noxious plants with misshapen heads. 
Of the noble company from the picture on the wall I 
could see no sign. Where had they gone? Had I dallied 
too long in the prison cell? So it would seem. At least I 
still had my knapsack, though I couldn’t remember 
putting it on my back again. 

In this place of big trees and dense shrubbery all 
directions seemed the same. I moved, instinctively as it 
were, in the direction of greatest light, though it was not 
an easy thing to distinguish even that. The gray twilight 
of the forest wrapped everything in a pall of obscurity. 

I pushed on, wading through the shrubbery and low 
clinging plants. This seemed to me a place of evil omen. 
How had I gotten here? I had no patience to consider 
that, not now, not with the feeling that something was 
closing in on me from behind. I had no idea what it 
might be. The main noises were of my passage, and now 
and then a little flaw of wind came through and ruffled 
the branches overhead. 

I remembered now that I had not eaten in a very long 
time, and I decided to stop and rummage through my 
knapsack. I didn’t think I had packed anything edible, 
but you could never tell, sometimes you drop in 
something; a half-finished sandwich, a piece of cheese, a 
box of crackers, anything would do. 

I put my knapsack on a little rise of ground and 
crouched down beside it. The light was failing. Soon it 
would be full dark. 

And I had no idea where I was or where I was going. 



16 



GALAXY 



I knew, of course, in a general sort of way, that this was 
one of the tricks they play on you in Phocis, one of their 
celebrated illusions, here in this place where nothing is 
as it seems. But that knowledge did me no good now, 
because it is generally true of every situation, it is always 
difficult to discern the truth from the illusion, even in 
hindsight, when it can do you no good. I cursed Llew for 
abandoning me, for so it seemed now. A breakdown 
could not account for his long absence. 

In my bag I found a package of nuts, a free gift they 
had given me on the transporter, and which I had not 
eaten at the time. I started to eat the nuts, but realized I 
would need water soon, for the stuff was very dry. Water 
is a commonplace miracle, only to be considered when 
you have it not. That was the case now. I got up again 
and looked around, with the vague idea of finding lower 
ground, where, I’ve been told, water collects. Wearily I 
packed up my knapsack again, slipped my arms into the 
straps. As I did so, I heard a voice, but I couldn’t make 
out what it said. 

“Who is there?” I called out. 

“A guide,” the voice replied. I turned, trying to place 
its direction. It seemed to be near me, yet I could see 
nothing but the dense green-gray of the forest, and the 
gathering dim shadows as night fell. 

“Come out and let me see you,” I said. 

There was no answer for a while. Then I heard a 
noise in the underbrush to my right and I turned. There 
was some sort of animal standing there, and it turned its 
head to look at me. I think it was a deer of some kind, 
colored mouse-gray, with sensitive ears that twitched in 
the mounting breeze, as though trying to listen to the 
message brought by the wind. 

“You have chosen a poor way to go,” the deer said. 

“Me? I didn’t choose anything!” 

“I’m not here to argue,” the deer said. “But it has 
been my experience that anyone who comes here does so 
through his or her own choice.” 

“I suppose that’s true, in a general sense,” I replied. 
“And I suppose also you are not a real animal.” 

“Perhaps not,” the deer said. “Does it matter?” 

“Real animals don’t talk, not in the general run of 
things.” 

“No. But men do not walk into portraits, in the 
general run of things, as you say. Have you not noticed 
that general rules are only for contemplation after the 
fact, when one can engage in comfortable generalizing, 
while what happens at first hand is invariably 
exceptional and specific?” 

“You’ve got a point there,” I said. “But I’m not here 
to argue discursive philosophy with you, especially since 
what you say is mundane in the extreme. Can you get me 
out of here?” 

“Perhaps,” the deer said. “Where do you wish to 
go?” 

“I had hoped to reach Phocis Central,” I told him. “I 
have friends waiting for me there.” 

“Then you are expected?” 



“Well, not really. I didn’t have time to tell anyone 
my plans before my hurried departure from Point Zero. 
The communication devices from solar point to point are 
difficult to manage, and I had thought to save time by 
merely coming. Sometimes it’s easier to send yourself 
than to send a message.” 

“True, enough,” the deer said. “But then you must 
suffer the consequences of being yourself your own 
message presaging your coming.” 

“What consequences?” 

“Messages are frequently disregarded. But I can see 
you have no wish to discuss these matters. Follow me, 
we’ll see what we can do for you.” 

The deer trotted off into the underbrush and I 
followed. 

Twilight was falling fast. The trunks of the trees 
were becoming indistinct. My throat was very dry, and 
after a while I asked, “Is there something to drink around 
here?” 

“Oh, yes, there’s something to drink, though I don’t 
think I would recommend it.” 

“I need water!” 

“Then of course you must drink. Come this way.” 

We had gotten onto a little path now, and it 
proceeded downward at no very steep angle. There were 
fireflies in the gloom, and they sparkled prettily. The 
forest had grown very still. After a while we came to a 
dark little pool lying in a declivity at the foot of large 
trees. I walked to its edge, bent down and with cupped 
hands brought up water. As soon as I had sipped, I 
greedily wanted more, and then still more. The deer 
stood very still as I drank, and I thought there was 
something judgmental in his attitude. 

“Is there anything wrong in what I’m doing?” I 
asked. “Surely the water is free for everyone?” 

“Oh, it’s free enough,” the deer said. “That’s the 
difficulty. It stays free inside just as it did on the 
outside.” 

That made no sense. And yet, I could feel the water 
in my stomach, and I bent to drink more. With 
interlocked fingers I drew it up to me. The water seemed 
to form a little transparent ball. I had to eat it rather than 
drink it. I stopped hastily and moved back from the edge 
of the pool. The deer was watching me curiously. I felt 
something peculiar going on in my stomach. I had a 
sense of inner expansion. It was as though the small 
amount of water I had drunk, surely no more than half a 
pint or so, were expanding. I felt the presence of water 
within me, not a part of me, separate, free, as the deer 
had said. 

“What is happening?” I asked. “What have you done 
to me?” 

“There are many keys to this place,” the deer replied. 
“I have merely provided what you claim to have needed. 
The rest is up to you, and to it.” 

I didn’t know what it was talking about. No, I did 
know, but I didn’t want to. Something was going to 
happen, and again I was not ready for it. The water in my 



SEVEN SOUP RIVERS 



17 



stomach was expanding. It wasn’t water, it was acid. It 
seemed to be dissolving me into it. 

“Help me!” I said. 

“I’m afraid I’ve already done so,” the deer said. And 
then the water rose within me, and I was a paper man 
dissolving into myself. 

The image made no sense to me, but there it was. 
Water was rising, and I fell to the forest floor, dropping 
with a squish. I was all water, held together by surface 
tension. It seemed to me most unfair, the way they ring 
these changes onto you. Whatever happened to the stable 
old world? Or had that always been a myth, a dream of 
order in an impossible world? 

I felt myself dissolving into myself. I felt the surface 
tension break, and I was water, flowing back down the 
forest into the little pool. I was aware of the deer, 
watching, and then moving away. There was something 
sorrowful about the set of his head, his large luminous 
brown eyes. I thought he felt sorry for me. God knows he 
had company, because I was sufficiently sorry for 
myself. 

But how can water be sorry? That question held my 
attention for a moment, then was gone. I was entirely of 
a liquid substance. I became aware that I was the pool of 
water. It would not be too far-fetched to say that it had 
drunk me. And now I was this and what was I to do 
next? 

“My sweetheart’s the man in the moon. I know I will 
marry him soon . .” 

I was listening to a thin, piping, childish voice that 
was somehow familiar. My head felt cloudy and full of 
cobwebs. Hadn’t I just been turned into water? What a 
relief to find that I was solid again, a man rather than a 
nature spirit or whatever it was I’d changed into. My 
relief was also accompanied by a sense of regret, 
however. Being in a dire situation is quite interesting! 

On second thought, however, I decided my relief was 
premature. I hadn’t yet received any visual information 
concerning my situation. Why was this? I could think of 
several reasons: first, that I had my eyes closed; second, 
that there was no light by which to see anything; third, 
that there was light, and that I did have visual perceiving 
apparatus, viz, eyes, but that my mind, brain, think-tank, 
whatever you want to call it, either wasn’t taking it in, 
or, was taking it in but was refusing to pass on results to 
other parts of the world-detecting system that was my 
mind/brain. 

It seemed to me there might be other possibilities. 
But I had no time to consider them. The first, the 
paramount question, was to explore the perceptual 
possibilities. This too could be narrowed down to one: 
should I be seeing anything or not? And if I should, 
should I take steps now to see what might be seen, so as 
to disabuse myself of the idea of complicity in what I 
was presently considering my own hysterical blindness? 
Or was I perhaps overstating the case? 

Because it seemed to me, even on the slightest 



reflection that I really didn’t have to force myself to see, 
it would either happen naturally or not at all. I thought of 
the evolutionary development of sight. Those early 
rudimentary creatures who are our ancestors seeing-wise, 
they surely did not have to apply will power to the matter 
of seeing, did they? They either saw or they did not see, 
and intentionally, that big soft plaything of the 
scientists, had little or nothing to do about it. 

Yet was it quite as simple as that? What had been the 
steps, the gradations, between seeing and not-seeing? At 
what point on the scale could a person be considered to 
be not seeing, and how did he cross the line, the great 
evolutionary line, into seeing? And, as far as that goes, 
were there other visionary senses beyond seeing, related 
to it, perhaps, but still distinct and different, of which 
seeing was but the first step? Might one say that 
visioning was to seeing as Hyperion to a satyr, to employ 
Shakespeare’s euphonious phrase? 

The more I thought of it the more I thought of it. 
This was serious stuff. One needs to decide things about 
the perceptual possibilities of a situation before going 
on. Until you know how you’re looking, how can you 
know what you’re looking for? Our ancestors were 
satisfied with much less, of course. Colored shadows on 
the walls of the caves, it makes one laugh now to 
consider it. But this was now, and the question, long 
deferred, needed dealing with. Or it needed not dealing 
with, but that too was a decision, and was based in turn 
upon a perceptual decision. 

“That’s certainly true enough,” Seligman said. “But 
have you considered the aura of comprehensibility that 
surrounds even the most unfamiliar proposition? We are 
unable to be taken completely by surprise, because the 
mind converts all precepts into the form of the familiar, 
of which the unfamiliar is but a part.” 

“By god, you’re right,” I said. “It’s difficult to pull 
off a good surprise, isn’t it?” 

“Yes. But you’ve done better than most. You have 
always been a good student. I have given you an A for 
your work in the aesthetics of self-deception.” 

The visual field had opened up just as suddenly as 
that. I was in a classroom. My only connection with what 
had come before was the knapsack. It was on the floor 
beside me, its mouth gaping open. Glancing down, I saw 
that someone had been rummaging through it. Myself, 
no doubt. I looked down and inspected. Yes, something 
was missing. It took me no more than a minute to 
ascertain that it was Glynnis’ clever pointy little machine 
that had been taken out by someone, very possibly me, 
and presumably put to work. 

I remember the charming smile on Glynnis’ face 
when he had given it to me. Or had he been a she that 
day? It’s so difficult to remember who is what at any one 
time in these times of easy sexual migration. But of 
course we don’t intend to open the question of sex here, 
no more than we would enquire as to what you had for 
breakfast. These are matters for individual conscience. 



18 



GALAXY 



The splitup, the convergence — these are matters to 
avoid, if it becomes possible. Put in its most simple 
form, Glynnis and I were not having sex that day so long 
ago when Glynnis gave me the little machine and said, “I 
will miss you,” calling me by name, whatever name I 
was going by then, and doing something else, too, 
making some gesture, poignant, unrepeatable. And then 
she gave me the machine. 

I looked around to see what had happened to it. The 
elg, as they call those small machines that converse in 
the Linshiean tongue, the language of sexual commerce, 
was resting on the floor near my feet. It was still moving 
in circles which were diminishing in speed and 
amplitude, following the well-known dictates of Rosko’s 
Law, that what was going on just before you perceived 
the situation cannot be safely inferred from what is going 
on now. The machine is difficult to speak about because 
of that. At this particular time when I was looking at it, it 
looked heavier than usual, more consequential, and 
worthy of a certain wary respect. 

I picked it up, thanking my lucky stars that I was no 
longer in the aqueous state, because I’d had a feeling that 
was going to be a difficult one, descriptionwise. I mean, 
after you say, I spread, what else is there to say? 

Luckily, this situation was quite different, leading 
me to think that the deer had not been entirely forthright 
when he warned me of ... But I couldn’t quite 
remember what it was. It’s hard enough to figure out 
what is coming up next, without having to think a lot 
about what has just gone before. And as for the passing 
states, those without enough perseverance to be worthy 
of describing, well, what can we say about them except 
full speed ahead and let every man watch out for himself. 

“Are you quite finished rambling?” Llew said to me. 

I shook my head and rubbed my eyes. After a 
moment things swam back into focus. There was Llew, 
still as an introprojected form, standing in front of me 
and surveying me with signs of a certain anxiety. I 
remembered that Llew had always been subject to 
concerns 

“I’m alright,” I said. “What’s going on?” 

“We’re trying to get you to Phocis Central,” Llew 
said. “I do wish you’d cooperate.” 

“I think I am cooperating!” 

“No, really, you must pay attention and not go along 
with everything that comes up. You know what it’s like 
in Phocis, the place has myriad attractions, one can go 
astray, in fact, going astray is the epitome of the Phocis 
experience, but it is also a sort of self-indulgence and 
you can’t afford that now, not if you want to get where 
you’re going.” 

“But where am I going?” 

And then it happened. I scarcely dare tell what, so 
momentous was that moment. As it seemed to me then, I 
looked up. I stared into the visual field, which is the only 
place to which you can direct your attention, normally, 
that is. On my right I saw the forest, lying out before me 
like a dragon, sunning itself on the main street of some 



hapless town in the unsure month of August, in Phocis of 
my direst predictions. 

And then I looked to my left, and saw there another 
sight, this one a city, a towering place of many metallic 
complications, running toward the dawn light with a 
faint trepidatious coloring. Insects moved in the forest, 
metallic bugs crawled in the city. I couldn’t quite believe 
it. Not really. There seemed to be a choice. 

I could go right, back into the forest, or left, into the 
city. 

As I looked at this split vision, I saw that the two, 
city and forest, were not truly contemporaneous. They 
seemed to be butted against one another in an imperfect 
joint. They were not coexistent. They were differently 
formed and strangely put together. There were details in 
the one not consonant with the details in the other. 

I did not know what to do, and decided to take the 
civilized way out. This was no time to get hung up in a 
disparity, if there ever is such a time. I turned my bad/ 
on the forest, which promptly winked out of existence. I 
advanced toward the city. 

Other sights came into play at the corners of my 
vision. I saw shooting stars, and big, slowly turning 
spheroids of an imperturbable grey color. I saw men and 
women dancing in the streets, under the blinding arc 
lights. I saw the haunted face of a young girl, her eyes 
turned toward me in grief. I looked further and saw 
something else. A trail, a road that mounted into the sky. 

Then to me so lying asleep a vision came without 
hands and touched me. It was none other than a pointy 
little machine, which had made its way out of my 
knapsack and was clinging to my shoulder. 

“What’s happening?” it asked me. 

“That’s a silly thing to ask me,” I said. “Where is 
Llew? He was just here a moment ago, unless I miss my 
guess.” 

“I’m afraid you do miss it,” the machine said. “That 
was not Llew.” 

“But how could that be?” 

“Easily enough, given the ever-present possibility of 
illusion, deception, and the gullibility of the multitudes.” 

I twisted my neck to look at this machine sitting on 
my neck, partially supported by my shoulder. He (as I 
eventually came to think of him) was a dull gunmetal 
green, exactly as I remembered. Little lights winked on 
and off across his surface. He resembled a rather large 
lump of metal that has lain for a long time in a river 
bottom. Yet his voice was seductive. I turned away from 
him quickly, because I did not want to lose sight of the 
city. Yes, it was still there. The forest was fading out of 
my split vision. My split vision was almost healed. If 
only I could keep my attention on the main chance: the 
city, food, comfort, sex, and movies! 

“Do you really think it’s as easy as that?” the 
machine asked. 

“What’s the trouble? Isn’t the city real?” 

“Sometimes it is and sometimes it’s not.” 

“What about this time?” 



SEVEN SOUP RIVERS 



19 



“It depends on your frame of reference, old boy.” 

“I don’t like to hear talk like that.” 

“But hear it you shall. You need a good talking to, 
my lad. This nonsense has gone on long enough. What 
are you trying to do, start a revolution? Haven’t we 
enough trouble around here without you adding to it?” 

To hear these words from a mere machine was 
humiliating in the extreme. It was annoying, how quickly 
a premise was hardening around me. I took thought, but 
not very far. 1 considered changing identities. But it was 
difficult with this thing clinging to me. 

And then I found myself in the streets of the city. 
They twisted like writhing snakes. Some of them twisted 
like snakes trying to go straight. It was one of those 
sights the cosmos sends your way from time to time, but 
not often. 

There were little shops on the ground level. I looked 
them over with some concern. What were they selling in 
those shops? Food, for example? Sex? There had to be 
something here I could buy and sell. You see, I was 
looking for a purpose. 

After a while I came across a purposes store with a 
gaudy sign in front. Purposes of all Kinds. I didn’t know 
what to make of that. It seemed a dire imposition, being 
forced to think of it at all. So I put down other words, 
covered my trail with another trail, put cross trails across 
the trails that showed the way I had gone. Just taking 
precautions. 

After a while I came to a government office. 
Observe fear all you who enter here. That was written on 
the door. I observed it, and I couldn’t help but smile, 
because that was so like them, the Phocians, diving into 
the heavy direness of statement, when all along they 
knew not what. 

But who was 1 to talk? I had to laugh aloud, because 
the whole situation was crazy and desperate and 
unworkable, and it had started out so well, and I knew it 
and could do nothing about it except continue: foul 
quitter doesn’t win fair adventure. 

It happened while I was standing there trying to shift 
mental gears. The moth-shaped clue went round and 
round and then dove into confusion, taking me along 
with it. 1 see the stars and the stars see me. Great haste 
makes great waste. Great wastes spread out on all sides 
of me. Where in hell did they put the city? Someone 
seems to have misplaced it and it wasn’t me. Goddamn 
them anyhow, the ones who spoil everything. And I had 
been so looking forward to this, to finding some nice 
discrete and reasonable proposition in which to hide 
im sell. I wanted a girl to love and a sandwich to eat. 1 
wanted a way out of the mysteries and uncertainties. And 
here I was in a space that refused delineation. 

What can I say about it? Narration has its limits. I 
tell \ou there was literally nothing there. From that small 
beginning, nothingness spread out on all sides, and as I 
looked, my vision increased in acuity, and I saw deeper 
and deeper into the nothingness. My eye ached for some 



little object to grab ahold of. Even the weight of the 
knapsack would have been a relief at this point. So this is 
death, I told myself, and I have reached it too soon. 

“Welcome to the kingdom of death,” someone said 
to me. 

I could of course see nothing. Pretty soon 1 was 
going to see plenty, but right now I couldn’t see a thing. 
And that was just too bad for me. Yet I had heard a 
voice. It welcomed me to death, the place I had long 
suspected I was heading for. It brought a certain relief, 
but with it the necessity of reply. 

“Hello,” I said. That seemed neutral enough. 

“Hello yourself,” the voice replied. 

So there I was in the midst of nothingness with a 
voice doing schtick with me. It was insupportable. But 
there was nothing to do but support it. I tried to conjure 
up a vision. Surely any something would be better than 
this nothingness. But the vision wouldn’t come. Instead, 
a smell came. It smelled like aging mouse-droppings. I 
didn’t like that at all, and its implications even less. 
What was that to do with me? I was in this place, and a 
voice was saying hello. 

“Now look,” the voice said, “we can’t go on like 
this. We need to find a way, a modus operandi. Can’t 
you hear me, Caroline? Can’t you hear me singing to 
you? Can’t you find a place in your heart for the 
embarrassed as well as the ones who didn’t give a damn, 
to say nothing of the ones who aren’t even there any 
more? Now I ask you, isn’t there a way we can get it on 
together?” 

“Perhaps if you’d show yourself!” I suggested, for 
the person whoever it was had failed to perform even 
that rudimentary act of civility. 

“Hah! That’s rich! The mud asking the pot to crow! 
That’s not what we want here at all. What we want is for 
something to happen. Isn’t that so?” 

“Perhaps enough has happened already?” 1 
suggested. It seemed right that I should go easy, try not 
to be careless, or try to be careless, but in a purposeful 
manner, I wasn’t sure which was the right tack to take. If 
only this damned incoherence would clear up! But no 
such luck, it went on, and I was going on, too. 

Then Sicelle was there. She looked as lovely as ever, 
her hair in a long wave down her front, her small 
heart-shaped face looking at me with what I thought was 
concern but might have been no more than dyspepsia. 

“Ogden,” she said, a name which I accepted at the 
time but later found more than a little unlikely, given 
what I remember of my circumstances, which I mean to 
get into later. But for now, look, do I look like an 
Ogden? 

“You look as if you’ve been ill.” 

That was a laugh. What else does one do, lying in 
bed this way, the overhead fan going and the heat rising, 
except to be ill, very ill, as ill as possible? That seemed 
to be the setup. But I wasn’t sure, that was the damnable 
thing. 



20 



GALAXY 



Patience. Cunning. Don’t give anything away. 

“Have I been here long?” I asked her. 

“Perhaps you shouldn’t speak just now,” Sicelle said. 
“Here, have some soup.” 

She lifted my head with one hand and poured soup 
into my mouth through a long hollow spoon. It was good 
soup, chicken soup, though I wasn’t sure what I was 
eating it for. Were the objects of life still to be 
maintained in some other place reserved for me, and 
would that place simply go on? Or was that asking too 
much? Despite my brave front, I wasn’t at all sure. 

“Now then, Ogden,” she said, “you just get hold of 
yourself. The confusion will lift. This is what they call 
the circle of confusion. I know you aren’t hearing me 
quite correctly. But try to make some sense out of these 
words.” 

Sicelle had always been a nice person, even when 
she was dating Edgar. I remembered those days of 
squalor, the little flat in the West Village, the coffee 
shops, the songs of the strolling minstrels, some from as 
far away as 12th century France. Those had been good 
days, though it hadn’t seemed so at the time. I wished I 
were there now, wherever there was. 

But then I remembered that these memories, 
although perfectly genuine, might not be my memories at 
all. It was not unknown for a traveler such as myself, 
before leaving the safe shores of iterative self-reference, 
where all you can do is think about yourself, and so keep 
yourself in existence, to borrow or rent or even buy one 
or more of someone else’s memories when he’s going on 
a trip to strange places, so he could have some people to 
look up when he gets there, since remembering a person 
is tantamount to knowing that person even if you’ve 
never actually met. 

I looked up. There was a light flashing overhead. A 
recorded voice said, “Visiting hours are over.” 

And then Sicelle began to fade. 

“Don’t leave yet!” I cried. “You are my last oasis of 
sanity here in a world I never made.” 

But she continued to fade, smiling her small smile. 
The walls were suddenly there, a yellow stucco, and I 
decided that ignorance was better than bliss, better than 
this, better than a kiss. 

When I looked up again, I was in a different place. 
That’s how it works sometimes. 

“Hello out there!” 1 called. But there was no reply. 
All was confusion. It was the circle of confusion that I 
have mentioned before. 1 didn’t know what to say about 
it. But you have to talk your way out of it, and after a 
while the survival instinct took over and words pressed 
and jumbled at the back of my throat. One sentence rose, 
and then another. 1 couldn’t find a way to express them. 1 
knew I was having a relapse. But to what? What was the 
dim meaning of all this? Where was I going? 

It was time to decide on a course of action. I 
imagined a staff of ironwood, strong, natural, a goodly 
substance that 1 could work with. 



Immediately I was out of the hospital room. Perhaps 
I had never been there in the first place. Or, rotten 
thought, perhaps I was still there. But in that case what 
was I doing going to a new place? 

Home was never like this, a sentence colliding in my 
head. Yet so it is, Ananda. The big old house, the 
walk-in closet fragrant with cedar paneling, the big tree 
outside with the spreading branches, “secret closets of 
lone desire,” as Sidney Lanier calls them, and 
superimposed on that, several apartments in several 
cities, brought here together to view the last of me, a 
dying remnant. No, sorry, didn’t mean that last. It takes a 
lot to tell about it. It seems to you blotchy, does it? Yet 
the intent to confuse is not there. All these templates of 
home crowding in on each other like transparent pages of 
a calendar whipping madly in the winds of time in which 
we sail. 

And so I reached the spot where I made one. “Hello, 
everybody, I’m home!” 

A stirring in the kitchen. Smell of apple pie, 
euphonious, unanimous. 

“Why, hello, Ogden,” said Mom. 

I had fallen into a page in the dark book. But it’s nice 
you can go back again, and again and again. I had a 
sudden desire to visit the chamber of ancestors. They 
were all there, even some we didn’t remember, 
facsimiles of those, who took place before reattribution 
could begin its work of making whole the torn pages of 
memory. There was Uncle Seth, Uncle Dan, Uncle 
George, Uncle Charles, there were all the aunts, ranged 
neatly on one side of the chamber, each doing a 
characteristic thing, pasting stamps into a collection, 
polishing silver, dusting a collection of old American 
glass. 

“What are you doing here?” Uncle Seymour asked. 
“I thought you were going on a trip.” 

“Why so I was,” I told him, “and I still am. But the 
unexpected turns and twists of this our life have brought 
me here again.” 

He smiled at me fondly; the fact that he wasn’t living 
confined him to this single chamber, and I believe he 
resented it very much. But we must have some 
differentiation between the quick and the dead, else 
what’s a heaven for? 

My mother called from the other room, would I take 
coffee with her? I hastened to join her in the 
yellow-wallpapered room, where the unremarkable trees 
of New Jersey cast their ever lovin’ light on thee. 1 never 
could figure out about mother, you'd think with this 
opportunity to find out certain hidden happenings from 
what they tell me was my childhood. I'd take advantage. 
But it doesn’t always work that way. There’s a certain 
reticence at work. Our family, the family of man, has 
spread so enormously since the anti-Platonic doctrines 
received general dissemination, that you’d expect .... 

Oh 1 don’t know what you’d expect. This 



SEVEN SOUP RIVERS 



21 



enormously extended family spread throughout space 
and time, all there, all waiting for you, and you for them. 
My own children coming for to carry me home. And yet 
it didn’t help, there was no happiness in it, only 
confusion, actually not a confusion in my own life, that 
went on as these things usually do, but a confusion in 
reporting what was taking place. 

For how am I to explain that through a loop, 
unexpected but inevitable, I had doubled back in my 
attempt to get into Phocis, returned to my own 
childhood, and was passing now through those caverns 
of time and memory? 

Well, I’ve said it, but it’s not convincing, the 
hypothetical man from Mars wouldn’t know what to 
make of it. I was there in the kitchen taking coffee with 
my mother, and at the edge of my vision I could see the 
pathway that led back to where I had intended to go in 
the first place. Should I avail myself of it? There’s 
always a moment of upset when you take your departure 
from the simulacra of your past. They are surprised — 
sorry, Mom, I have to mount yonder rainbow and ride 
away. The next time you come all is forgotten, or at least 
not spoken about. No one mentions the fact that you 
simply climbed invisible steps in your own kitchen and 
disappeared into the god knows where. But it seems to 
hang there like a chrome-plated fart, a bit of nastiness, a 
bit out of character. 

And yet I was not ready to go as quickly as all that. I 
had been a long time away from the home place. It’s 
surprising how seldom it comes up on the round of 
possibilities, born again into the round of revisitations, 
where nothing happens for the first time and there is no 
end. Or so 1 believe. No end! 

I looked around at those scenes of my childhood and 
wondered to whom they belonged. It seemed strange and 
unbelievable to me that I could ever have swung in that 
swing, that I had played croquet with that scratched and 
dirty mallet with the orange band. It meant as little to me 
as the flamingoes of a previous time. Yet there was 
nothing more to say about it. Not only can you not come 
home again, you don’t even want to, because you can't 
even recognize the place except from the newspaper 
clippings. 

In a blink of the eye the scene had shifted. 1 don’t 
suppose I really had to blink my eye to make it happen. 
Sicelle had warned me about that sort of thing. A slip of 
the lip can smear the lipstick, she told me. I was there 
with her again, this time in a pleasant little pub in 
London. This hadn't actually happened yet, of course, 
but it was bound to take place in the eternal recurrence of 
things. 

I ordered a bottled beer, a Mexican one, just to be 
devilish. Sycelle ordered one of those colorful drinks 
with creme de menthe in it. We settled back in the 
pleasant fug and tobacco-colored smoke of the place 
with its glints of light off the brass and its rich red of 
mahogany bars. I was enjoying myself. This was as close 



as I’d ever get to the first time. We create a new first 
time by forgetting the other first time. 

“So where are you going?” Sicelle asked. 

“To Phocis,” I replied. 

“Again?” 

I had never been there before, but I nodded. It’s a 
mistake to think in terms of novelty here in the world of 
crowded images and endlessly long shiny curving 
corridors in which everything is cycled and recycled, 
displayed and destroyed and displayed again. 

Nevertheless, I persevered. “I’m going to Phocis,” I 
said. 

“Take me with you,” she said. 

I shook my head. Novelty was what I was after, still 
and forever. Sicelle was nice, Glynnis was nice, but I 
was not prepared to settle down, to put my memories of 
past and future into the bank, to live my life with 
blinkers, blinders, glanders, salamanders. 

“You’re making a mistake,” Sicelle said, brushing 
back her bright, tightly kinked hair. I finished my beer 
and ordered another one. I vaguely noticed that this was 
a time before my operation. I felt quite fit and was happy 
to notice it. You have to give some credit to the cosmos 
that I suppose directs all this nonsense. 

And then I was in a different place, this one with 
gleaming chrome surfaces and big animated portraits on 
the wall of beings I couldn’t remember having seen 
before but of course I could be mistaken. Llew was with 
me again. He was holding my knapsack. 

“You almost forgot this,” he said. “The authorities 
want you to have it back. Nothing illegal in it, I hope?” 

“I hope not, too,” I told him, because you can never 
tell what a knapsack will pick up when it’s not in your 
hands. 

“Now then,” Llew said, “it’s time we saw the 
burgomeister or whatever they call him here. He will 
regularize your position. I’m afraid it’s a black mark 
against you that you entered by the wrong door.” 

"But how was 1 to know?” I asked him. 

Llew shrugged. “Don’t tell me about it, old boy. I 
know the impossibility of avoiding egregious error. Who 
knows better?” And here Llew rolled his eyes, alluding 
to some misfired adventure in the past that he thought I 
was aware of. As a matter of fact, I had neglected to rent 
Llew’s second-rank memories, contenting myself with 
just a couple of the really ripe ones. 

1 said, “I had no indications as to the correct path.” 

“And that excuses you from error, it really does, but 
only in my eyes. The authorities here take no excuses, or 
at least none that I’ve been able to offer so far in your 
behalf, and they are fairly ticked off about it, silly 
buggers that they are. You went to the prison without 
paying your entry, by the way.” 

“1 didn’t even know I was going there.” 

“Tell that to the cops.” Llew shook his head and 
rolled a cigarette. 

1 wondered if he was using dope. It goes in and out 



22 



GALAXY 



of legality so rapidly, you scarcely know whether you’re 
breaking a law. One man has said that no matter what 
you do, you’re always breaking a law somewhere. 

And then we ate lunch. Bloody well about time, that 
was my estimation of it. It was one of those oriental 
deals, everything cut up and unrecognizable and laced 
with a heavy sauce. I put it down without difficulty. 
Llew was toying with his food, drinking cup after cup of 
strong coffee. He seemed unhappy about something. 

After a while he said, “There’s something I need to 
tell you.” 

I waited. He didn’t speak. 

I said, “Well, come on, out with it. Is there 
something else wrong I’ve done?” 

“I don’t know how to tell you this, old boy.” 

“Try just saying it.” 

“It seems you’ve been marked for death.” 

At first I just looked at him. And then I said, “And 
you tell it to me like that?” 

“My dear fellow!” Llew said. “There’s no good 
way.” 

Explosions in the grass. The moves of the rinderpest 
beast. What useless images flock to the mind in times of 
stress! What can you say when they say to you, “You’ve 
been marked for death?” What can I say after I say I’m 
sorry? You think to yourself, I always knew it was 
coming. Looks like this is the night the old continuity 
burns down. 

You say, “In what form does it come, then, this thing 
you call death?” 

“You may not recognize it when it comes,” Llew 
said. 

“Then why do you tell me about it?” 

“Forewarned, forearmed, old boy. Or so they say.” 

But was I forearmed? I had a lawyer’s writ 
absolutely barring death from coming within 30 feet of 
me without having previously obtained my written 
consent. I was afraid he would not abide by that. What 
could they do to him if he overstepped his bounds, and 
came to serve me here in the land of eternal youth? They 
could shout and grumble all they wanted, Death pretty 
well did as he pleased. But of course, there was always 
the possibility of making a deal. 

I left Llew and consulted a phone book. There under 
Death, Deals with, I found the numbers of several Death 
Brokers. 

I called the first on the list. There was no time to 
lose. 

He came to me at once, a short little man with a wen 
on one side of his freckled forehead. It may have been 
something else but I call it a wen. He sat back behind a 
big desk. The background had changed too, of course. 
He wore a green surgeon’s gown. I learned later he had 
been operating on volunteer patients over at the 
Saltpetriere. 

“What can you do for me?” I asked, deciding I might 



as well get it all out front. 

“First of all, are you sure you received the notice?” 

I dug into my pocket and found it. After Llew had 
told me, I had taken a moment’s notice, and sure enough, 
I still had it. 

And so I went on. It was important to do this in a 
carefully measured way. How much grief is brought on 
by haste, and its ominous twin, Thompson! But I had 
determined that I could get out of the snakepit, as they 
call the place where death hangs out with his crosscut 
saw and his crossword puzzle, his bull’s pizzle and his 
rainy day anthems to a certain faded glory of the power 
that once had been. 

“It really was bad of Mr. Death,” Glynnis said, to 
me, “coming to our party that way. I know he can go 
where he wants, but we had taken such care to get it all 
just right, you would have thought he could have waited 
just a few hours, until everybody had come and gone. 
He’s done it for plenty of other people, why not for us? 
But no, no such thing.” 

He was applying a formal technique, one I knew 
well, dissonant regression in a vinegar base, but despite 
my experience I was taken in by its magic anyhow. He 
had taken me back to the party which had not happened 
yet, but where I was doomed to meet Mr. Death. I was 
sipping one of those long delicious ice-green drinks and I 
had just decided to get the hell out of there before there 
was trouble when I felt a finger tap me on my bare 
shoulder and I turned and at once it was like there was a 
vast great singing in my ears, and my senses swooned, 
and suddenly I was elsewhere. The changes were coming 
on a little too fast for my liking, but I was in a great 
palace made of a dark marble and ebony, with caryatids 
holding up the ceiling and ornate stuff on the upper 
walls, I forget what they call it, and there was a lake just 
behind, a long lake of polished dark glass, so silent it 
was, and in the midst of the lake I saw an island with a 
small marble house framed in dark poplars. 

I was considerably relieved, for I hadn’t known how 
death would present itself, and I had rather hoped for a 
classical presentation, something quite Grecian, as a 
matter of fact, or Italian, they know how to deal with 
these things. I surely didn’t want something raw and 
Egyptian, and as for the single gods, they played much 
too rough for me. I didn’t want to get to the bottom of 
the illusion, not at all; once you’re at the bottom of it 
they say you come out the other side. I was prepared to 
take the boat to the island, and sure enough, the boat 
came gliding up, a long gondola sort of thing, with a tall 
hooded man standing on its stern poling it along. 

The chimes of Deja Vu thundered in my ears. I had 
been here before! 

“Well then,” I said, “where are we off to now?” 

“Spare me the so-called witticisms,” Death said (for 
it was he, or him, whichever you please). 

Death said, “Just get in and we’ll be on our way.” 

He sounded impatient. It was the first I’d ever heard 
of Death being impatient, and it startled me more than 



SEVEN SOUP RIVERS 



23 



dying itself, which I couldn’t quite remember at this 
point, something about falling down in a pool of blood, I 
believe, or did I die at the party? Never mind, here I was, 
close to what I believe is called Death’s kingdom. 

And so I got into the boat, sitting in the little seat 
amidships and trailing my fingers in the water. The 
steersman turned to his task of poling, and soon we were 
gliding across the dark water, on our way to what had to 
be the isle of the dead. Sometimes you just know things 
like that. 

We splashed and paddled along, and after a while the 
helmsman paused, letting his long pole trail in the water. 
“Have you got a cigarette?” he asked me. 

That got me sore. I raised myself from my torpor and 
said, “You’ve got a nerve! It’s cigarettes that brought me 
here, not directly, I can’t prove that, but if I hadn’t 
smoked them all those years, tearing up my lungs and 
pouring heavy metals and arsenic and shit like that into 
my bloodstream. I’d probably still be on Earth now, 
going about my proper business of worrying instead of 
being here on this boat going to this island where I’ll bet 
they don’t even have movies.” 

“Even without cigarettes, people die anyhow,” Death 
reminded me. He fumbled in his shroud, located a pack, 
and flipped one into his mouth with a practiced gesture. 
He held out the pack to me. “Smoke?” 

“I thought you didn’t have any.” 

“I just like to smoke other people’s. Go ahead, it 
can’t hurt you now.” 

I took a cigarette, and felt my pockets. Yes, I still 
had a lighter, funny how a Bic can survive death itself. I 
lighted cigarettes for us both. We puffed contentedly. 
Death sat down on the thwart opposite me, holding his 
cigarette in bony fingers. I puffed and looked out across 
the water. It was a contemplative moment. I’ve thought 
of a lot of things in my time, but if you’d ever told me 
I’d be sitting in a small open boat with Death, I’d have 
told you you were crazy. And it was nice to smoke a 
cigarette after death, when you could only benefit from 
it. Cigarettes after death cost a lot less than the 
before-dying kind. 

“So what’s it like, being Death?” I asked him. I 
wasn’t really interested, but you have to say something. 
“Well, it’s a job,” he told me. 

“You must meet some interesting people,” I said. 
“Stands to reason. They all come this way. Not 
necessarily to me. I’m not the only Death. Allegory is all 
very well, but we have to be practical as well. There are 
plenty of us Deaths, and we take different forms.” 

“So look,” I said, “I guess I can assume from this 
meeting pretty much that there’s life after death, huh?” 
“You can assume what you please,” Death said. 
“That won’t necessarily make it happen.” 

“What happens on the island?” 

“You’re about to find out.” 

I didn’t like the sound of that. So far, I had found 
anxiety to be very real indeed, and everything else to be 



unsure. “What did you do before you were Death?” I 
asked him. 

“I was working as a nature spirit,” he told me. “I 
starred in one of those allegorical scenes with nymphs 
and cherubs and bearded men. It was pretty nice work 
for a while. Then we had to do scenes from the Inferno. 
That wasn’t so good.” 

“Have you ever had a girlfriend?” 

“Sleep is the bride of Death.” 

“What do you want to do when you grow up?” 

“There are occupations in this universe,” he told me, 
“that you can’t even imagine. I’d like to try out one of 
those.” 

The boat had been guiding itself toward a little 
landing stage on the island. In the misty background I 
caught glimpses of huge figures with interesting features. 
I knew they were representing something, but 
unfortunately for me they hadn’t put in captions so I 
can’t tell you what. But that left me with a lot of 
freedom. That’s one thing about allegorical scenes, it 
doesn’t matter what you do, things carry on anyhow. 

While we were talking, I made out figures standing 
on the dock, waving. 

“Who are they?” I asked. 

“Friends of yours, no doubt,” Death told me. 

I couldn’t imagine anyone I knew well enough in 
hell to come greet me when I arrived. As we moved in to 
the dock, I started to recognize them. Dartagnan, 
Ulysses, and a big fat fellow with a moustache who, 
unless I missed my guess, was Balzac. I hoped not. I’d 
never read a word he’d written, though I’d been long 
planning to. How embarrassing to meet him after death 
and not being able to say anything about the Comedy 
Humaine\ 

“My dear fellow!” said Balzac. “How nice to see you 
here! No, don’t worry, you’ve never met me before. But 
I had the great good luck to be put on the welcoming 
committee. It affords a very good platform from which 
to continue my investigations into the human condition.” 

“But to what purpose?” I asked him. “And how come 
you speak English?” 

“English is the universal language of death,” Balzac 
told me. “Since this is my country now, it is only correct 
that I should speak its language. And write in it, too. For 
of course I am still writing.” 

“And publishing?” 

“Indeed. You’d be amazed at how large our 
publications list is in hell. We publish far more books 
than the living, which stands to reason since there are 
more of us and we are more permanent. You know of 
course that the dead stay dead a long time. That has its 
drawbacks, but it does maintain the continuity. But tell 
me, are you really dead?” 

“Well, I assume so,” I told him. “Is there a test that 
one must pass?” 

“Indeed there is,” Balzac said. “You’d be surprised 
how many of the living try to sneak into here. While still 
living, mind you! And it just can’t be tolerated. We have 



24 



GALAXY 



life-detectors on all sides. Malefactors are punished by 
exclusion: they are told that life must go on, and sent on 
to one of the worlds of the living.” 

I couldn’t think of a better outcome. Although 
Balzac had presented it as something not so good, I 
wasn’t too sure. I continued out the landing stage and 
onto the shore. It was a pleasingly classical outlook, I 
was happy to see: long lines of dark poplars, formal 
gardens, gleaming white statuary scattered here and 
there. And that indefinable melancholy air that always 
infects mausolaria and the like. I was feeling quite good 
by now, because it struck me that I was going to gain 
either way; be here in the place of the dead if I were 
indeed dead, be sent on to further adventures if I 
happened to be among the living. 

I was told there would be a banquet that night, in 
honor of various new arrivals, and that formal dress was 
required. “None of your slipshod ways around here,” 
Dartagnan said, and scowled fiercely. I noticed that he 
too spoke English but decided not to ask him about it. 

I was taken to the palace, one of the smaller palaces, 
and of course it was all free. As far as I could tell. How 
can you pay your way in the afterlife? 

My servant was a dogfaced person with a bare chest 
and an Egyptian sort of kilt. He looked a bit uncanny at 
first, but I soon got used to him. 

After a bath and a shave, I looked over the formal 
clothing they had laid out for me. It all seemed perfectly 
correct. I lay down on the bed for a brief nap, and soon 
fell asleep. 

I had a dream, but was quite aware that I was 
dreaming. It seemed to me that one of the walls 
dissolved and a group of persons came through. They 
were all dressed in Egyptian apparel, and many of them 
had the heads of animals and birds. They beckoned to me 
and I arose from the couch. I was feeling somewhat safe, 
since I knew I was dreaming. But not completely safe, 
because there were mysteries to this place that I knew 
nothing of. 

I followed them through the wall and down a series 
of shallow steps to a river that lapped the stone walls. 
There was an open boat, built of papyrus unless I miss 
my guess, and there was a boatman with a bird’s head 
standing in the rear. I wanted to tell them that I had 
already done the boat scene, but I couldn’t seem to form 
sounds. They ushered me into the boat. Sitting beside me 
was a pale woman with dark hair. She was very lovely, 
but she looked so still that I despaired of making 
conversation with her. 

At last I said, “So do you come here often?” 

“Levity is not the best idea in a place like this,” she 
told me. 

“I’m not worried,” I told her. “I’m dreaming all 
this.” 

“That doesn’t mean it isn’t happening,” she said. 

“Is it going to?” I waited but she didn’t reply. 



“I didn’t mean to be flip,” I said. “Could you tell me 
what comes next?” 

“They will take you to the necrarium,” she said, “and 
bind your limbs and your jaws. They will draw out your 
brains through your nose, and your intestines through 
your anus, and then they will inject various 
preservatives.” 

“You’re kidding,” I said. 

“Not at all. I mean it.” 

“But I don’t want them to do that!” 

“It doesn’t matter what you want. You’re dead, your 
wishes are no longer of any interest to anyone.” 

“What about Balzac? Did they treat him that way?” 
She shook her head. “He made a deal.” 

“I want to make a deal, too!” 

She gave me a long, level look. “I’m afraid you have 
nothing to bargain with.” And then she turned away 
pointedly, thus ending the conversation. 

I gazed around me on all sides as the boat proceeded 
through the long dark tunnel. I was looking for a way 
out. There didn’t seem to be any. Then, after a while, we 
passed a long concrete landing stage. There were dogs 
sitting on the shore. They looked at me with their 
tongues hanging out. 

I didn’t like the look of it, but what lay ahead 
pleased me even less. I stood up, prepared to fight 
anyone who tried to stop me. No one did. I stepped from 
the boat to the stage. The boat went on, and I thought I 
heard the sound of ghostly laughter. 

The stage gave way to a tunnel, quite broad and high, 
made of rough dark unpolished stones. There was just 
enough light for me to see as I walked through the 
gloom. The tunnel slanted slightly downward. None of 
the dogs at the entrance had molested me, nor did they 
follow me as I proceeded. The tunnel grew narrower and 
narrower, and soon I had to stoop to go on. It curved and 
the constriction became narrower, until finally I was 
reduced to crawling. And then I stopped, because there 
seemed no point in going on. But when I tried to turn 
back, that way had constricted, too, so that I was huddled 
over in a stone tunnel, with narrow exits on either side 
through which I could not fit. 

A wave of despair came over me. Then I 
remembered that I still had my knapsack. I pulled it 
around to in front of me and took out the little pointy 
machine. 

—ROBERT SHECKLEY 




SUPPORT UNLIMITED 



25 




SUPPORT 
UNLIMITED 

By SANDY SAIDAK 

Illustrated by Elston 

ational Support Referral, this is Jenny, may I 
help you?” 

“Hi. Could I have the number for a 
group that will help me quit smoking?” 

Jenny crushed her cigarette into the ashtray. “Try 
(800) 555-QUIT. And I hope you have better luck with 
them than I did! 

“National Support Referral, this is Jenny, may I help 
you?” 

A sobbing soprano was on the other end. “Well, it’s 
like ... I don’t know ... I’m really confused . I’m 
twenty- three years old, and I’m involved with a 
fifty-four year old man. Nobody understands ... I just 
don’t know what to do anymore — ” 

“Do you want help getting out of the relationship, or 
help staying in it?” 

“What?” 

“1 have a number for Older Men Anonymous. It 
helps women who are constantly attracted to destructive 
relationships with older men — ” 

“No! Everything’s fine with us\ It’s our families who 
are driving us crazy! They keep trying to break us up and 



my friends don’t understand and . ” 

“Then you want the May/December Support Group. 
(800) 555-6518.” 

“Wow! That’s great. Thanks.” 

“National Support Referral, this is Jenny, may I help 
you?” 

“Could you give me the number to the national 
Chastity Society, please?” 

“That’s (212) JST-SYNO.” 

“Thanks. Do you have a listing for Randy Sex 
Club?” 

“No, they’ve sort of disappeared, but the British 
Hellfire Club has a group here. Want to try them?” 
“Okay, what’s the number?” 

“(800) 555-6969.” 

“Thanks. I figure, if one doesn’t work, I’ll try the 
other.” 

“National Support Referral, this is Jenny, may I help 

you?” 

“Yeah, I just called for the number of the National 
Rifle Association. You gave me the number for Handgun 
Survivors United!” 

“Sorry about that. One moment, please.” Jenny 
carefully punched the request into her terminal, while the 
man’s nasal voice droned in her ear. 

“You liberal airheads probably think that was funny, 
don’t you? Well, I’ll tell you something — ” 

“Here’s your number, sir,” Jenny said, feeding him 
the recording, then disconnecting with a satisfying punch 
to the key. 





26 



GALAXY 



“National Support Referral, this is Jenny, may I help 
you?” 

“I’m looking for a community of Madonna fans. Do 
you have one?” 

“Just call (800) MADONNA and someone will help 
you.” 

“Thanks.” 

The switchboard fell quiet, so Jenny stood and paced 
the small room, stretching. The other terminal was dark, 
the swivel chair before it empty. Jenny glanced at the 
clock: almost ten-thirty. No hope now that Marcia would 
show up for her shift. 

Not that she’s been a whole lot of help around here 
anyway these past few weeks. Jenny hoped Marcia was 
getting the help she needed from Supporters 
Anonymous. 

She returned to her chair, and called her supervisor. 
“Sharon, hi. Look, could you send someone down 
here to spell me for a few minutes?” 

“Sorry, kid,” came the Long Island accent that 
always grated on Jenny’s nerves. “I’m stuck here alone 
myself. You’ll have to wing it today.” 

“But I’ve got a really important call to make.” 

Sharon laughed. “Well, you’re in the right place for 
it, aren’t you? Just put ’em on hold for a while if you 
have to. You know how our customers are: they always 
come back.” 

“Great,” said Jenny as the screen lit up again. 
“National Support Referral, this is Jenny, may I help 
you?” 

Incoherent screaming and sobbing assaulted Jenny’s 
ears. 

“Please, you must calm down, or I can’t help you. 
Just take a deep breath and tell me the problem.” 

“He left me! He went back to his wife! Don’t you 
understand? My life isn’t worth living without him!” 
About halfway through the tirade, Jenny realized the 
voice was female. She cleared the Gay/Lesbian 
Matchmaking Service from her screen, and refocused her 
search parameters. 

“Would you like to try a Twelve Step program for 
relationship addicts? Or possibly Women Who Love Too 
Much?” 

“No, you stupid bitch! Don’t you understand? I have 
to get him back! I don’t want to get over him! He was 
going to leave his wife for me, but somehow she got her 
claws back into him and ... oh, I don’t even care if he 
divorces her anymore. I just can’t stand to lose him.” 

“I have a number for I.M.A. That’s the International 
Mistress’ Association. They offer 24 hour phone support 
for all those lonely times when he’s with his family, and 
workshops on how to go from mistress to wife.” 

“That’s perfect! What’s the number?” 

“(800) HESMINE.” There was a click. 

“You’re welcome,” muttered Jenny. “National 
Support Referral, this is Jenny, may I help you?” 

“Uh, yeah, hi. I, uh, I’m drunk again, and I’m real 
lonely.” The voice was slurred and punctuated with hic- 



cups. 

“Would you like the number of an Alcoholics 
Anonymous group near you?” 

“Screw that, lady. I tried them already. Now I’m just 
lookin’ for someone to get drunk with.” 

“I’ve got ‘Sons of Anachreon’ at (800) 555-WINE. 
If that doesn’t work, I’d suggest you try your local bar.” 
“Oh. Hey, yeah! Thanks, lady!” 

Jenny switched on the recording that informed 
callers that all operators were busy, and warned them not 
to hang up. Then she used her terminal to punch in an 
outgoing call. 

Jenny hadn’t realized she was nervous until she 
heard the click of her call being answered, and felt a rush 
of adrenaline. “Hi, Arthur — ” she began, only to hear a 
mechanical female voice intone, “Thank you for calling 
CrossWorld Travel. If you want to hear about this 
week’s special package deal, press one on your touch 
tone phone — ” 

“What?” said Jenny. “Voice mail! What’s going on 
here? This isn’t supposed — ” 

“For weather reports of your destination, press two. 
If you want to speak with a travel agent, press three.” 
Jenny shook her head several times, muttered some 
very colorful metaphors, then pressed three. 

“Arthur, you’d better have a good explan — ” 

“To speak with an agent about domestic travel, press 
one. For foreign bookings, press two.” 

Jenny pressed two. “All of our agents are busy now. 
Please remain on the line and your call will be taken in 
the order — ” 

By now, the switchboard was lit up. With Muzac in 
one ear and a caller in the other, Jenny went back to 
work. 

“Hi,” came a tremulous female voice. “Uh, do you 
have a place that helps incest victims?” 

“Are you a survivor or a perpetrator?” Jenny asked. 
There was a moment of silence. “A survivor. I hope. 
Why?” 

“Then you want (800) 555-AMAS. That’s Adults 
Molested As Children.” 

“Thank you. Uh, what if I’d said I was a 
perpetrator?” 

“Then I’d have given you the number for their 
support group.” Jenny disconnected quickly, for she 
heard the telltale sounds of hold being interrupted. About 
time. 

“How may I direct your call?” came a voice, very 
much like Jenny’s own. 

“I need to speak with Arthur Scott. It’s urgent.” 

“One moment please.” 

“Okay but don’t put me on—” Jenny was again 
awash in Muzak. “I don’t believe this!” She gave up and 
took the next call. 

“Uh, hi, I’m a lost soul. Can you help me find God?” 
Jenny sighed. “The Ecumenical Council has a 
number that will give you a listing of every church in 
the—” 



SUPPORT UNLIMITED 



27 



“I’ve already talked to them. I don’t want a church! I 
want God. I want to know which religion is the right one, 
and what I need to do to be saved.” 

“Let me take care of these other calls and I’ll get 
back to you. National Support Referral — ” 

“I need help,” said a sobbing voice. “My family are 
Jehovah’s Witnesses. I’ve been trying to leave the 
church, but they’re scaring me so much I don’t know if 
I’ll ever get out. And I’m afraid they’re right. What if it 
really is Satan trying to get me to — ” 

“Please hold for a moment.” 

While Jenny tracked down numbers for the last two 
callers, she answered three more calls, directing one to 
Multiple Partner Marriage Support, one to the Alfred G. 
Packer Cooking Society, and one to a recovery group for 
ex- fans of Madonna. 

Finally, she got back to the two religious calls, 
directing one to Gods R Us, and the other to a twelve 
step program for Religious Addicts. It was only when 
she cleared her board that Jenny realized she had mixed 
up the two numbers. “Probably just as well,” she said 
with a sigh. 

“Arthur Scott’s office,” said the voice in Jenny’s 
other ear. 

“Finally! Look, I need to talk to Arthur. It’s urgent!” 
“Whom may I say is calling?” 

“Jenny Green. He’s expecting the call.” At least I 
hope he still is. What was going on here? 

After a moment the operator said, “Yes. He’s on 
another line now, but he wants to talk to you. Please 
hold.” 

Jenny lit a cigarette and took the next call. 

“Hi,” said a pleasant male tenor. “I was just 
abducted by aliens. Who can I call to compare notes with 
others like myself?” 

“Try the Betty and Barney Hill Society, at (800) 
UFO-TRIP,” Jenny said, taking in a deep draw of smoke. 

“Thanks. Hey, that was pretty fast. How often do you 
get calls for them?” 

“You’d be surprised,” said Jenny, moving on to the 
next call. 

“Do you have some kind of group for chocolate 
lovers?” asked a man who was clearly talking with his 
mouth fall. 

“Sure. Several. Why don’t you start with The 
Chocolate Gourmet Society at (800) 555-COCO?” 
“Thanks.” 

“You’d better take the number for Chocoholics 
Anonymous too, while you’re here.” 

“Why would I do that?” 

“Trust, me, you’ll be wanting it sooner or later.” 
“Jenny?” The familiar voice came from the other 
ear. 

“Arthur? Hey, what’s going on? Since when do we 
use crap like voice mail and secretaries?” 

“We just started. I told you we’d find something 
useful down here! Isn’t it great?” 

“Not really. Look, you’ve got to get me out of here! 



My research is finished and my report is ready. I want to 
leave for home as soon possible.” 

“Now, Jenny, calm down. There’s lots more work to 
be done and you’re one of our best field agents ...” 
“Screw that!” Jenny stopped herself and took a deep 
breath. “Listen to me, I’m even starting to sound like 
them. Look, Arthur, these people are harmless. They are 
no threat to us whatsoever, they have nothing of use to 
us, and I want to go home!” 

“We still have to ascertain whether they know about 
our presence on their planet.” 

“They don’t. Well, they do, but . What I mean is, 
some do, but all they do is form groups to discuss 
experiences that probably never happened, and they still 
wouldn’t be a threat anyway, and . Never mind, it’s all 
in my report.” 

“File your report and I’ll see what I can do about 
getting you home. In the meantime, I’m very busy, so . 

9? 

“Arthur, I don’t think it’s such a good idea for any of 
us to stay here. I think this place is rubbing off on us.” 
“Nonsense! There’s so much we can learn from 
these people!” 

“Arthur, I really need to get out of here.” 

Arthur sighed. “All right, if you insist. You’ll have 
to talk with Goldstein.” 

“Who?” 

“He’s our new head of operations. Hold on. I’ll 
transfer you.” 

After a static-filled pause, a mechanical voice said, 
“To file a report, press one. To request a transfer, press 
two. To leave a message . ” 

. And the keyboard gently rose to meet her. 

—SANDY SAIDAK 



MISTS 

•F 

PAWN 

by Chad Oliver 



A young man makes an unplanned trip 
through space and time to Europe 50,000 
years ago where Neanderthal and Cro-Magnon 
man engage in a battle for survival. 
Another in the series of collectible hardbound 
classic science-fiction from 
SIRIUS SCIENCE-FICTION. 

Edition limited to 125 copies - $225.00 each. 
1-800-869-0658 OR 916-432-1716 




28 



GALAXY 




MIDNIGHT PEARLS 
BLUE 

By WILLIAM F. WU 

Illustrated by Valencia 

^ I ^ r. Lew peers closely at me, having just hit a 
1 power switch. It bothers him to have me observe 
/i,/ too much of the time. Then he walks away, back 
to his desk, where he falls into his swivel chair. 
It rolls backward slightly on little wheels, squeaking. 

“How did I do?” I ask him. 

Dr. Lew leans back and smiles at me. His hair is 
black, but thinning on top, over a full, friendly face with 
a long jaw line. He tends to be chubby, but I think I see 
the grace of a former athlete in his decisive movements. 
I don’t know why he wears sweaters all the time. If given 
the chance, I would want to say I look like him, except 
for the sweaters. 

“How did I do?” I ask him again. 

Dr. Lew smiles and shakes his head in mild 
annoyance. “I keep telling you over and over — I’m not 
testing you. I’m testing my own work. You’re smart 
enough to understand that; if anyone knows that, I do.” 

“Will you play it for me now? I still get to observe 
them after I do them, don’t I?” 



“Yes, of course.” Dr. Lew presses a couple of 
buttons on his desk and I . stood on the rough broken 
asphalt of the road, which was shiny and slick with 
moisture. The night was nearly black, except for the two 
small lights on the cabin in front of me. They burned 
fuzzy white spheres of illumination into the fog, 
obscuring the door between them. 

I walked forward, bundled in my scarf and heavy 
coat, inhaling the chilly sea air. The small wooden 
building rested solidly on a cliff. As I stepped forward, I 
could hear the waves breaking rhythmically below, 
though the fog hid the expanse of dark ocean and the 
distant sky above it. 

When I looked upward, the light from the little porch 
simply reflected off the swirling mist above me. I knew I 
was at the edge of the Pacific, on a quiet shorecliff road, 
but all I could actually see was the surrounding fog, and 
lights at the front door. 

The door did not beckon. It was merely the only 
choice. I grasped the cold handle and opened the door. 

She was there, of course. I closed the door behind 
me. The coarse, clean interior of the cabin was warm. I 
pulled the scarf from my neck and unbuttoned my coat. 
Then I shrugged it off my shoulders and let it drop with 
my scarf to the floor. 

“Hi, how are you?” She smiled pleasantly, speaking 
as though we had been no more than co-workers, or 



MIDNIGHT PEARLS BLUE 



29 



maybe distant cousins — as though we had last seen 
each other yesterday, instead of years ago. 

“Fine, Ah Yen.” I remembered that she had quit 
using her English name. I liked that. 

Ah Yen was sitting on the other side of the 
unfinished plank table, facing me. An old-fashioned 
kerosene lamp was the only object on the table. Its light 
revealed her in the darkened cabin. 

Ah Yen’s black hair fell straight on both sides of her 
face, before curving inward just above her shoulders. 
The flickering flame shone on the smooth amber skin of 
her full cheeks and on her casual smile. Her nose was 
straight, short, and perfect. She looked up with dark, 
slanted eyes. 

“And how have you been?” she asked. “Would you 
like to sit down?” She waved one hand daintily toward 
the bench on my side of the table, several steps in front 
of me. 

I shrugged and walked forward uncomfortably. “I’ve 
been all right.” 

Her formality stung. It had no enthusiasm. She had 
acted this way from the moment we had separated. 

Her New York accent was stronger than ever, but it 
was cultured and precise. She had been a child when her 
family had moved out of Chinatown, where she was 
born. I doubted she would ever move out of New York. 
She had stopped here during a trip. 

“So, what are you doing now? In your career, I 
mean. Let’s see, you finished grad school when, around 
. .” As she continued to speak, she shifted slightly on 
the bench, drawing my attention downward. 

Ah Yen wore a very snug light blue dress of thin 
fabric, with a low rounded neckline. It was a simple 
short-sleeved shift, and matched the string of graduated 
blue pearls around her neck. Her large, rounded breasts 
pushed against it and I recalled her wistful comment 
from years ago, that she just wasn’t built like most Asian 
women. She was short, though, and soft without being 
fat. 

“ . time ago. How about you?” 

I had no patience for small talk. “What happened?” I 
asked in as neutral a tone as I could manage. “Why did 
you end it the way you did? Why couldn’t you even talk 
to me about it afterward?” 

Ah Yen wrinkled her nose and cocked her head to 
one side. It was the cutest of her playful expressions. 
“That was years ago. Now tell me how you’ve been. 
Really.” 

“You don’t want to hear how I’ve really been,” I said 
casually, still standing over the table. “So, let’s see . .” 

I told her about my career steps — the research, 
especially the big grants, and of course the tenure. In her 
presence, I cared nothing about any of it. I didn’t even 
listen to myself. While I spoke, I watched the depth of 
her eyes, remembering those eyelids flicker as her breath 
came in shortened gasps. Her mouth had opened for 
more breath, revealing even white teeth. In the bright, 
stinging light, the pearl necklace I had given her slid 



downward on her slender neck to one side. Her face was 
slack with concentration, and her fingers suddenly 
clenched like claws — 

“That’s very good.” Ah Yen smiled pleasantly. “I 
knew you’d do well.” 

I inhaled deeply and tried again. “Ah Yen . would 
you talk about it a little? Just for a minute? After all this 
time — ” 

“Oh, I don’t think it would accomplish anything. I 
have to meet someone. Nice to see you.” Ah Yen rose, 
and the blue pearls caught the light. She was still 
gorgeous. 

“No! No . wait.” Suddenly anxious, I ... see the 
kind face of Dr. Lew at his desk. 

“You felt a great deal this time.” He notices that he 
has buttoned his sweater crookedly and he begins to 
unbutton it. 

“You took it away from me again.” My tone is 
bland, as always, but he recognizes the accusation. 

“Well, I’m just not satisfied yet. Besides, I gave you 
all those painful memories and put you in a scenario that 
would draw them out. Next time, I’ll make them happy 
feelings. Promise.” 

“Emotion is part of personality. I should have it.” 

“Yes, and you will. We’ve honed your intelligence 
so finely that you test out consistently right around 100. 
In some ways, that was tougher for me than making you 
a genius.” 

“You’ve told me that before.” 

“I know. And I’ll remind you again, no doubt. Of all 
the artificials we have, you’ll be the first to carry a 
developed emotional personality as well as your 
intelligence. I just wanted to pull that particular 
emotional pattern out of you again . never mind why. 
That’s the reason you don’t feel any emotion now, 
though you remember feeling it during the scenario.” 

Dr. Lew rises to switch off our communication. It 
bothers him to have me observe too much of the time. 
Out of spite, I don’t tell him that he is wrong — I do feel 
emotion now — especially anger at him and a strange 
empty hurting. I don’t tell him he is wrong — that 
memory, intelligence, and emotion are inextricably 
bound. 

The memory of pearls blue still burns in my circuits. 



— WILLIAM F. WU 




DOUGLASS-TRUTH INSTITUTE 

PO BOX 794 PENN VALLEY CA 95946 



SEND A DOLLAR FOR POSTCARDS AND CATALOG 



30 



GALAXY 




THE GREATEST LOSS 

By BARBARA 
JOHNSON-HADDAD 

Illustrated by Tom X 

ome consider the parents' loss to be the greatest, 
but they only lost their lives. As they lay in their 
bedroom last month in oblivious slumber, their 
children crept silently in and killed them. In the 
darkness, long past midnight, these unnatural children 
snacked upon their parents’ vital organs. 

They snapped their father’s bones and sucked out his 
marrow. They tore out their mother’s heart. Their 
grandmother was attracted by this noise and came into 
the room to investigate. When she saw the gory remains 
lying dismembered on the floor, she shrieked and 
fainted. Luckily for her, the children were sated by that 
point and spared her life. 

Some consider the grandmother’s loss to be the 
greatest, but she only lost her mind. It was broken 
beyond repair when she saw the horrid mess that was 
once her daughter and son-in-law. When she recovered 
consciousness, she was lost in a world of her own 
making. 

She now lives her life with a fanatical desire to 
pamper and please her dear grandchildren. She is quite 
happy, in her own way, as she bakes delightfully 



cannibalistic meals for her little darlings from the body 
parts they bring her. No doubt, she will remain happy 
until she forgets to feed them one night. 

Some consider the children’s plight to be the greatest 
tragedy, but they only lost their humanity. They seem 
content though, and frisk like the wolves they so 
resemble as they hone their hunting skills throughout the 
night. But even wolves do not eat their own kind. 

Since they are not yet eating each other, this may 
actually apply to them. Can they truly be called human 
any more? They will undoubtedly remain content, 
hunting happily each and every night until some brave 
soul manages to destroy them. 

No friends, it is your own families and neighbors 
who are victims of the greatest loss. The police have 
mysteriously disappeared from the streets and the 
phone-lines leading out of town are dead. 

There are rumors of alien invasions, secret Army 
experiments and the end of the world as the cause of 
their problems. Everyone is frightened and stays inside at 
night. It is from their numbers that the new victims are 
being drawn. 

Every night a new man, woman or child loses his or 
her life and if too many of them die, you could well be 
next. 

— BARBARA JOHNSON-HADDAD 





THOROUGHLY MODERN MAGIC 



31 




THOROUGHLY 
MODERN MAGIC 



By JACK NIMERSHEIM 

Illustrated by L. Larsen 




“Thank you for contacting The MagicLamp™ 
Corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary of 
WellWishers®, Inc. Remember, at MagicLamp™, we seek 
pleasure in your fulfillment. 

“In order to serve you more effectively, your request 
will be automatically directed to the appropriate 
department. Please pay close attention to the various 
options described within each of the following messages. 
At the sound of the tone, you may make a selection by 
rubbing your lamp the specified number of times. 

“If you are a first-time caller and wish to make 
general inquiries concerning any MagicLamp™ service, 
including our standard, three-wish contract, please rub 
the lamp one time. 

“If you are a current MagicLamp™ client and have a 
question concerning the terms or conditions of your 
contract, please rub the lamp twice for Customer 



Service. 

“If the purpose of this call is to place an actual wish 
request, please rub the lamp three times. 

“Quality Control representatives stand ready to assist 
anyone who has experienced problems or difficulties as a 
result of a previously fulfilled wish. To contact the 
Quality Control department, rub the lamp four times. 

“All other parties, please remain by this lamp. A 
trained representative will be with you shortly.” 

Beep 

Rub. Rub. Rub. 

“Thank you. One moment, please . ” 

“You have reached the MagicLamp™ Petition and 
Request department. Please select a general category that 
best describes the nature of the wish you are placing at 
this time: 

“If your wish requires a financial transaction 
involving legal tender of any type or denomination — 
drachmas, dinars, dollars, pesos, pounds, rubles, rupees, 
riyals, and so forth — please rub the lamp one time. 

“If your wish pertains to the pursuit of power — 
whether it be personal, professional or political in nature 
— please rub the lamp twice. 

“To request a romantic encounter or, alternately, to 
access our optional, adults-only Triple-F™ service, please 
rub the lamp three times. 

“If your wish involves revenge, reprisal or any form 





32 



GALAXY 



of organized protest or retaliatory action against an 
individual, group, organization, institution or 
government, please rub the lamp four times. 

“If the nature of your wish is not covered under any 
of the previous options, please remain by your lamp. A 
Petitions and Request agent will handle your call 
personally.” 

Beep 

Rub. Rub. Rub. 

“One moment please . ” 

“Welcome to MagicLamp™’s LoveLink™, where 
romance and pleasure converge in magical moments of 
dreams fulfilled and desires satisfied. From the 
following, select the option that best describes the type 
of romantic interlude in which you’re interested: 

“If your wish involves short-term, innocent flirtation, 
please rub the lamp one time. 

“To request assistance in initiating a more permanent 
relationship, please rub the lamp twice. 

“If your wish involves casual relationships of a 
purely sexual nature, please rub the lamp three times. 
Warning! You must be at least eighteen years of age to 
select this option.” 

Beep 

Rub! Rub! Rub! 

“Thank you. One moment please . ” 

“Welcome to Triple-F™, Fantasies, Fun and Fetishes 
", a limited-access service dedicated to fulfilling the 
wishes of our more mature and discriminating clients. 
Before proceeding, please reread Section 14.5 of your 
original contract. It contains important information about 
additional charges and obligations associated with using 
the Triple-F™ service. After reviewing this information, 
rub the lamp twice to indicate agreement to the terms 
stipulated therein. 

“To return to MagicLamp'-’s LoveLink” without 
incurring any charges associated with accessing the 
Triple-F" options, you may rub the lamp one time.” 

Beep 

Rub. Rub. 

“It will take a moment to process your response. 
Please stand by ” 

“We appreciate your patience. A rider has been 
added to your original contract indicating your 
agreement to accept any and all terms or obligations 
associated with transactions initiated from within the 
Triple-F™ service. Select from the following options the 
one which best describes the resources we will require to 
fulfill your request: 

“If your wish or fantasy involves sexual contact with 
one or more members of the opposite sex within your 
own species, please rub the lamp one time. 

“If your wish or fantasy involves sexual contact with 
one or more members of the same sex within your own 
species, please rub the lamp twice. 



“If your wish or fantasy involves sexual contact with 
one or more members of a species other than your own, 
regardless of gender, please rub the lamp three times. 

“If your wish or fantasy involves some combination 
of two or more elements selected from the participant 
profiles outlined previously, please rub the lamp four 
times. 

“If no additional participants are required to fulfill 
your Triple-F™ wish or fantasy, please rub the lamp five 
times.” 

Beep 

Rub! Rub! Rub! 

Welcome to the inter-species section of 
MagicLamp'“’s LoveLink™. Select from the following 
options the one that most closely corresponds to the type 
of activity in which you would like to engage: 

“If your wish or fantasy involves mammals 
indigenous to the planet Earth, please rub the lamp one 
time. 

“If your wish or fantasy involves reptiles indigenous 
to the planet Earth, please rub the lamp two times. 

“If your wish or fantasy involves sea creatures 
indigenous to the planet Earth — excluding mammals 
and reptiles, which should be identified using the 
appropriate input listed previously — please rub the 
lamp three times. 

“If your wish or fantasy involves flying creatures, 
indigenous to the planet Earth — excluding mammals, 
which should be considered members of the first 
category listed above — please rub the lamp four times. 

“If your wish or fantasy involves marsupials 
indigenous to the planet Earth, please rub the lamp five 
times. 

“If your wish or fantasy involves creatures 
indigenous to the planet Earth that are not covered under 
any of the previously listed categories, please rub the 
lamp six times. 

“If your wish or fantasy involves extraterrestrial 
creatures — that is, any creatures not indigenous to the 
planet Earth — please rub the lamp seven times. 

“If the nature of your wish or fantasy is not covered 
by any of the previous options, please remain by your 
lamp. A Petitions and Request agent will be with you 
shortly to discuss your situation.” 

Beep 

Rub! Rub! Rub! Rub! Rub! Rub! Rub! 

“It will take a moment to initiate the selected 
sequence. Please stand by . .” 

“Welcome to The Galactic Gateway* the universal 
network node of MagicLamp™’s LoveLink™. The 
Galactic Gateway*, established in 2159 A.D., local Earth 
reference, is designed to satisfy the more creative 
requests of truly imaginative Triple-F™ customers. 

“Please be advised that the services provided through 
The Galactic Gateway® are subject to local jurisdiction 
— defined as any laws and/or statutes enacted by the 



THOROUGHLY MODERN MAGIC 



33 



recognized government of the district, province, region 
or territory in which your wish or fantasy is fulfilled. 
Furthermore, you consent, through your recognition of 
this authority, to indemnify LoveLink™ and The 
MagicLamp™ Corporation as well as all other divisions 
of WellWishers", Inc. against all legal responsibilities for 
any claims, actions or proceedings initiated under the 
auspices of local jurisdiction, as defined above. 

“To indicate agreement with the terms stipulated 
herein, please rub the lamp once. 

“To exit the Galactic Gateway* and return to the 
previous Triple-F™ options, please rub the lamp two 
times.” 

Beep 

Rub. 



“A review of your account reveals that you have a 
previously registered fantasy pending on The Galactic 
Gateway”. Our records further indicate that, due to 
recently enacted legislation passed in the local 
jurisdiction, your prior request can now be honored. 

“To initiate the previously entered scenario, please 
rub the lamp one time. 

“If you wish to cancel the pending wish and conjure 
up a new fantasy at this time, please rub the lamp twice. 

“To preserve your previous wish for future 
fulfillment and submit a new request, please rub the 
lamp three times.” 

Beep 




fiaiaxy 



3mit 

-sr 




* 


££. 




m ■ 


*fr 






•x 







THE 

SHIllT 

$14.95 

Red and black on white, 
100% cotton shirt. 
"Galaxy - The Legend 
Returns" printed on back. 



THE 



MUG 

$9.95 

Red logo on 11 oz. 
porcelain mug. 



Plus $3 each shipping and handling 

CALL 1-800-869-0658 or 916-432-1716 

Or use the Order Form on Page 90 



Rub! 

“Allah be praised,” Achmed whispered reverently, 
gazing around him in wonder. Three moons traversed a 
purple sky above him; celestial ellipses punctuating the 
alien heavens. If this unusual panorama provided an 
initial indication of his current surroundings, a quartet of 
naked — at least, he assumed they were naked — and 
exotic creatures rubbing seductively against him 
established it beyond a shadow of a doubt. Either he was 
dreaming or Achmed Falassa had, indeed, been 
transported to N’virna, the legendary Pleasure Planet. 

One of the exquisitely provocative creatures picked 
that precise moment to pinch Achmed on a somewhat 
indelicate part of his human anatomy. So much for the 
dream theory. This was definitely N’vima. 

As it did in the ancient days, in the time of epic 
fables and fabled epics, the magic worked. Achmed 
realized that all of this had been accomplished with 
advanced technology; still, magic — like beauty — is in 
the eye of the beholder, and a virtual paradise offered no 
less potential for ecstasy than the real thing. 

“Allah be praised,” Achmed intoned a second time, 
already conjuring up a variety of creative ways to make 
love to the creature who had pinched him — if he could 
only pick her out among the four identically luscious 
bodies now writhing at his feet. 

— JACK NIMERSHEIM 

Bains Fine Arts 

UNLIMITED 

AN 

INTERGALACTIC 

ART DEALER 



-/\zt that's 
Out Of ^kis YOoztd 

Representing 

Menlo Macfarlane Della Heywood 
R.C. Trice Kelly Rivera 
Tom X E J. Gold 



Earth Phone (Vancouver, B.C., Canada) 

(604) 327-3071 




34 



GALAXY 




THIS SPACE FOR 
RENT 



By CHARLEE JACOB 

Illustrated by Boyd 



When You ’re Hungry 
Snickers Fills The Hole. 



here was a hole. One space that hadn’t been 
fl sold or leased as ad mileage. Through it 
twinkled a few brave stars that were nearly lost 
in the commercial glare. Squinting, maybe you could see 
them. With my old eyes, never. 

You couldn’t tell kids these days that the whole sky 
used to be filled with stars. Blackly purple as a window 
made of amethyst glass, glitter so dazzling it filled you 
with wonder. 

These days: rotational squares, leased by the month 
for personals: 

Susan — 1 Told You I Would Give 
You the Moon and The Stars. 



Will You Take What 's Behind Door Number One and 
Marry Me? — Love, John 

As opposed to permanent squares, leased to 
perpetuity. Or to Chapter Eleven. Whichever came first. 

MacDonald’s — Over Eight Zillion Sold 

I wondered if they meant Big Macs or stars. They’d 
sold the stars long ago. 

“Hey! They sold the last square! Did ya hear?” Lyle 
announced as he came through the door, his arms laden 
with pre-wrapped, pre-boxed generigifts labeled Mom, 
Dad, Guardian, Sister, Extended Family StepSibling, etc. 

“No! Really? Who bought it?” Patti sat up, ears 
perked. 

“Don’t know,” Lyle shrugged as he set his bundles 
on the floor around the nitinol tree. By spring it would be 
reformed as a big Easter bunny. Last Thanksgiving it had 
been a pilgrim. Right now it was a spruce and there was 
a star at the top. Ludicrous, that star, but I couldn’t take 
my eyes from it. “Bet it was the Japs though. That last 
square cost a fortune. They’re gonna set it into place 
tonight as part of the Christmas Eve ceremony.” 

Up through the glass ceiling we could see the 
network across the twilight sky, lift-offs from huge 
cranes and mighty batlike maintenance ships so high 
they were insects across the Boardwalk of heaven. So 




THIS SPACE FOR RENT 



35 



much for Rockefeller Center and the virtual reality 
carolers in Washington D.C. with those faint, cold 
background twinkles across computer-sim fallen snow. 

“I remember when they didn’t have to do that,” I 
frowned, griping with every crunchy nibble I took from 
one of Karen’s cookies. 

My daughter always baked them this special night of 
the year for the grandkids. Her holiday apron read: 
N.E.S.T.L.E.S. 

Nestles Makes The Best Chocolate 

There’s one up there that matched it. The stars like 
grains of frost white sugar had vanished, but sweets were 
big business. 

“The sky was already lit at night,” I grumbled mostly 
to myself because they wouldn’t listen, didn’t know. 

“Yeah, daddy. Don’t get started tonight, okay?” 
Karen sighed impatiently, wiping a strand of Loreal 
Starlight Blond from her brow. Somewhere a patch of 
the sky proclaimed she was worth it. She turned to me, 
one oven-mitted hand perched on an obstinate hip. 
“Frankly, daddy, as I recall we couldn’t see much of the 
stars anyway. In our yard back home it was murky and 
smelly.” 

“We were in the city by then,” I bit my withered lip. 
“Too much neon and pollution. But on the beaches, don’t 
you remember. ?” 

I tried sucking a stray chunk of nut out from between 
my teeth. Colgate had helped me keep most of them even 
to my advanced age. Toward the northern horizon where 
once flared Aurora Borealis was their ad with the smile 
like a ghostly Cheshire cat. The aurora was an earth 
phenomenon, mostly, but without the great vault of 
night, what was it? You could sort of see it there at the 
right time of year, as one saw the flashing lights of 
emergency vehicles on a remote highway, out of range to 
hear the sirens, knowing there was trouble somewhere. 

Would I trade those teeth for Omar Khayyam’s Field 
of Night, or for Ursula K. LeGuin’s Lathe of Heaven, or 
for Byron’s “night of cloudless climes and starry skies”? 
The traditional, solemn but hopeful ornament at the top 
of the tree saddened me. What slouched toward 
Bethlehem? Madison Avenue, Tokyo, Munich? 

Overhead: 

Peace On Earth 
Good Wool Toward Men 
Burlington 

“But if they block up the last piece, how will Santa 
get through?” Li’l Lizzie asked honestly, her tiny face 
scrunched in worry. 

“He comes from the North Pole,” I told her gently. 
“So he doesn’t come through anything. He’s just north of 
us, is all.” 

“Not that Santa,” Li’l Lizzie huffed, waving her 
chubby hand to dismiss it, doing a pretty good imitation 
of her mother. “Ever’body knows he’s a fake. I mean the 
real one, cornin’ from space.” 

I was appalled. 

“Where ’d you get that notion?” 



“From the Prophet’s weekly message,” Lyle pointed 
up. “The guy that predicted that those human sacrifices 
would begin on a daily basis in Mexico City. And that 
Elvis would be found living in a retirement home in 
Jersey.” 

“But those things really happened,” I protested, 
shuddering, thinking about the new Aztecs trying to keep 
back the beasts of the twilight. Of the King wrinkled and 
palsied with clacking dentures at the age of one hundred 
and three. “There can’t be a space Santa.” 

“There is. The Prophet says he’s coming down in a 
Ship,” Karen replied. 

She read that Prophet square as often as she bought 
The Enquirer at the supermarket. 

Even in my sleep I could see the ads behind my lids, 
imprinted lastingly on the retinas in the final flash before 
I closed my eyes. Through that damnable glass ceiling 
that all buildings had to have by law. And all the houses 
were one story dwellings so that everyone could always 
see, always want to buy. It’s why we’d spread out so far, 
ultimately from sea to shining sea. Not because we’d 
finally overpopulated. Karen had three kids. One to 
replace herself, that was automatic. One to replace her 
husband, my son-in-law Lyle Senior, who’d died 
installing Tony The Tiger where the morning star used to 
be (so that people would see him first thing come 
breakfast and crave those Kellogg’s Com Flakes). And 
one to fill the void left when my Caroline died. I 
personally painted the inside of her coffin lid with stars 
in phosphorescent paint. I installed a music chip that 
would forever play “Good Morning Starshine” from the 
play Hair. 

(“The Earth Says Hello! ”) 

Well, we were kids when that came out. 
Fifteen-years-old in Greenwich Village. Caroline had 
long hair swinging; she was barefoot with Venus in her 
eyes. The morning star. 

Imprinted on my retinas was our new Cassiopeia, 
pursing her cybersuction lips, fast twitch muscles in snug 
Guess jeans. Spleenball’s steroid hero Zekele O’Mally 
strutted in bonecrusher, brain musher, antigrav Nikes. 
The modem Ursa Major. The precocious tike selling 
Sony droidmate action accessories was the Little Dipper. 
Constellations of passionless glitz rose and set on the 
horizon and thus marked our passage through time. 

Some mimed down godlike, others simply filled 
their squares with our history and morals all in 
billboards. Coca-Cola, alone, was the invocation of thirst 
to humanity. Polaroid: Preserving All That We Wish To 
Remember. Homey, heart-hearth, knee-jerk. Mercedes- 
Benz: Simply The Best Car For The Hairpin Curves Of 
Space At The Speed Of Light. Ego, wannabee arrogance, 
for those idiots who had to pretend that old Highway 101 
went straight up. Space was for those who could pay for 
it. All you other guys were grounded. Look up through 
the glass for the rest. This was as far as it goes, as far as 
it went. 

Lyle was pointing to the ceiling again. Or rather. 



36 



GALAXY 



Lyle was pointing to the ceiling again. Or rather, 
beyond it. 

“They’re getting ready to light!” 

Most of the maintenance shuttles were between the 
cracks now and thus invisible. The seams between the 
prints on the panoramic quilt. 

In the last porthole of the sky was a flash. We 
jumped, thinking that terrorists might be trying to disrupt 
the festivities. 

“Damned atheists,” Karen muttered, hand over her 
heart, awaiting the sound of an explosion. 

“Nah, it’s probably Greenpeace, Mom,” Lyle shook 
his head. 

“Santa!” Li’l Lizzie squeeled, clapping her hands 
greedily. “I wanna deathbot and a martian pyramid 
playhouse and a hovertrike and a...” 

“It’s a meteor,” I corrected them all as I went to the 
door to watch from the porch. “It’s coming down fast.” 

It descended, blurred like a cataract. 

Karen dropped a tray of cookies to the floor. Patti 
climbed from the sofa where she almost never got up for 
any reason. Lyle tripped over the baby. But Li’l Lizzie 
didn’t wail once, she was so eager to get out to claim her 
rightful trove. 

Neighbors gathered on their tiny plots of yard to 
watch. The light came down; a few people screamed. It 
stopped suddenly, whirled into a rainbow. Disappeared 
upward again. Gone, except for the man in the street who 
had not been there before. 

His suit wasn’t really red but it was sort of rust 
colored. Close to his little body, a second skin of satiny 
steel or maybe it was a plastisilk. 

“Santa! What you bring me?” Li’l Lizzie held her 
arms out for scooping. 

He spun in our direction, muscles trained for 
reaction. But he was clearly disoriented. 

“Santos,” he corrected, puzzled she could know him 
at all. 

He looked at us, then up. Then back at us. Up again. 

“Is this Earth?” he gulped. 

He looked up again and I could hear him reading out 
loud from the ads. 

“White male executive seeks adventurous 
androgenous alien for mutual recess invasion and vessel 
exploration. Send hologram for discreet reconnaissance 
of your qualifications to P.O. Box 99960, Grand Central 
Station.” 

“Yeah, son,” I told him. “This is Earth all right.” 

“You leading an invasion?” Lyle asked eagerly. 

“No, I was bom here,” Santos replied. “Aliens took 
me away a long time ago. I’ve been living — ” he 
gestured toward the sky, “ — out there all this time.” 

“So why’d you come back to this dump?” belched 
Tom from next door. He had his black smoking jacket on 
and a beer in his hand. 

“I saved some high muckety’s life in an ion storm,” 
he sighed wistfully. “It’s a long story. Anyway, he 
offered me anything I wanted as well as awarding me the 



governorship of a small world.” 

I was fascinated by the scars on his face, 
disfigurements I could see through the complicated mesh 
of his suit. His hair was cropped so close that the ridges 
of his skull were freakishly visible as having been 
somewhat rearranged, perhaps in a ritual pattern of 
tattooing. He had lost an eye and it had been replaced by 
a faceted gem that clicked, recorded, measured, glowing 
all the while softly as if progressing through degrees of 
red shift. 

But the other eye looked up and around hoping to 
find something familiar, some milestone or glorious 
sight. His nose wriggled in the lump of his face to detect 
a former fragrance. His mouth was open as if to sob. In 
the other eye did I see a boyish blink, a tremor that 
suggested being lost and helpless? Had this battlescarred 
warrior ever been that? 

“What did I ask for? Why, to see Earth one more 
time,” he said, a bit bitterly. “Before I took over my post 
as governor.” 

He scanned the sky, the gemstone snapping, a 
shutterspace whisper. 

“Morris Funeral Homes. We Plant You Down There 
While Your Soul Comes Here,” he read, lips curled 
down in a snarl. 

“Santa, where’s my presents?” Li’l Lizzie bawled. 

The man knelt down before my baby granddaughter. \ 
He put a hand inside his suit. It went in with no bulge or 
apparent pocket, and he pulled out a luminous green 
tube. He put one end of it in his mouth and blew, his 
ravaged cheeks puffing. 

It sounded like a pennywhistle. Motes of shimmering 
light came from sconced chips along the length, swirled 
upward, formed tiny unfamiliar animals. Made birds that 
might have really been strange butterflies. These danced 
and sang with a delicate reediness. 

Li’l Lizzie clapped her hands with delight. 

“Oh, thank you!” she sighed, her mouth round. 

Santos presented it to her. 

“Merry Christmas, sweetie,” he smiled. 

At that moment the lights all over the mighty ad 
sweep went on. Strung clear across the firmament in a 
hot web of cheer, mirthless in its sheer ferocity to adorn 
Dow Chemical, Ford, and Faberge: When The Scent Of 
Sex Isn’T Enough with something akin to grace. Far 
away we could hear applause. Across the whole of the 
state a roar of thunder went up from those not on our 
street with the man from space. They’d seen the flash, 
too, more than likely, but had considered that one of the 
lights was only misfiring. 

Silent night, holy night, all is calm, all is bright. 
Being sung more or less in sync all over the world. We 
heard it like a faraway radio, scurrying up closer as even 
the neighbors turned away and began to sing. Santos and 
I stared at each other as Karen and her kids took it up. 
Li’l Lizzie tried to toot it on the instrument, adoring the 
alien angels that floated with each note. 

“I’m truly sorry you came back just to see this,” I 



THIS SPACE FOR RENT 



37 



told him. 

I imagined how I would feel. I knew how I did feel, 
after all. 

“How could they do this?” he asked, his one good 
eye full of pain. Odd that it was only the gem eye that 
shed what looked to be tears. 

“You have to ask?” I shrugged. 

He smiled. It was crooked, jagged as lightning. The 
smile I’d expect Thor to have. 

A flash of light in the sky again. 

“They’re coming back for me,” he said quietly. 
“They said they couldn’t give me much time. A few 
minutes. A damned long way to travel for a few minutes. 
I thought I’d be disappointed to have to return so soon to 
the stars but, mister, I can’t wait.” 

I gulped, shivered, then blurted. 

“Please take me with you! I don’t have long to live. 
I’m eighty-five, and I only weigh a hundred and twenty 



pounds. I can’t die peacefully having to look up from my 
deathbed at that.” 

He took my hand as the ship spun overhead. Most 
folks paid no heed, sure it was part of the show. Those 
people at Westinghouse could do anything, couldn’t 
they? 

We could see it after, reading it backward from 
outside earth’s atmosphere, like the logo on a door to an 
office. 

No longer a hole! 

When You Look to Heaven 's Height 
To View in Wonder Glory ’s Night, 

You ’ll See You ’ve Lost the Starlight Brave 
So Now ’s the Time for: 

BURMA SHAVE 

— CHARLEE JACOB 





The Truffle Shop 



Brought Right to Your Home 
featuring the finest 

Chocolate Truffles 



MAIL ORDER 



CALL TO ORDER YOUR 
TRUFFLES & TORTES TODAY 

1 - 800 - 366-3538 

or (916) 265-3539 
408 Broad St. • Nevada City, CA 95959 



by Chef Willem DeGroot 

The T ruffle Team invites you to share 
the excitement of tasting the world's 
best chocolate truffles. Made with 
delicious Belgian chocolate, right here 
in our custom kitchens by ChefWillem 
DeGroot, they are shipped to you 
fresh every day. Send a gift assortment 
to your family and friends today — 
and don't forget to send a box to 
yourself! Call today for free brochure. 
1-800-366-3538 

DEGROOT'S PERSONAL 
GITT SELECTIONS 



#500 - Round Mini Truffle Gift Box (8) $25.00 

#550 - Mini Truffle Gift Collection (16) $39.50 

#575 - Deluxe mini Truffle Collection (18) $42.50 

#901 - Nine Truffle Gift Box $37.50 

#601 - Six Truffle Gift Box ..$27.50 

#401 - Four Truffle Gift Box $20.50 

#701 - 3 Layer Truffle Torte $31 .00 

#710 - Chocolate Oblivion Torte $26.00 



Prices include shipping charges 



WHITE CHOCOLATE 

Hazelnut 
Key Largo 
Orange Napoleon 
Treasure Island 

♦ White Almond 

♦ Lemon 

MILK CHOCOLATE 

Cafe Mocha 
Raspberry 

♦ Espresso 

♦ Peanut Butter 

♦ RaspberryCream 

♦ Truffles without alcohol 



SEMISWEET 

151 Rum 

Amaretto 

Gold Rush 

Grand Marnier 

Highlander 

Matterhorn 

Mint 

Zinnabar 

♦ Black Forest 

♦ Dutch Treat 

BITTERSWEET 
Black Tulip 
Caf6 Diablo 

♦ Double Dutch 



38 



GALAXY 




MUgwump FOUR 

By ROBERT SILVERBERG 

Illustrated by Heywood 

I Miller was only trying to phone the Friendly 
Finance Corporation to ask about an extension on 
his loan. It was a Murray Hill number, and he had 
dialed as far as MU-4 when the receiver clicked queerly 
and a voice said, “Come in, Operator Nine. Operator 
Nine, do you read me?” 

A1 frowned. “I didn’t want the operator. There must 
be something wrong with my phone if — ” 

“Just a minute. Who are you?” 

“I ought to ask you that,” A1 said. “What are you 
doing on the other end, anyway? I hadn’t even finished 
dialing. 1 got as far as MU-4 and — ” 

“Well? You dialed MUgwump 4 and you got us. 
What more do you want?” A suspicious pause. “Say, you 
aren’t Operator Nine!” 

“No, I’m not Operator Nine, and I’m trying to dial a 
Murray Hill number, and how about getting off the 
line?” 

“Hold it, friend. Are you a Normal?” 

A1 blinked. “Yeah — yeah, I like to think so.” 

“So how’d you know the number?” 

“Dammit, I didn ’t know the number! I was trying to 
call someone, and all of a sudden the phone cut out and I 
got you, whoever the blazes you are.” 

“I’m the communications warden at MUgwump 4,” 



the other said crisply. “And you’re a suspicious 
individual. We’ll have to investigate you.” 

The telephone emitted a sudden burping sound. A1 
felt as if his feet had grown roots. He could not move at 
all. It was awkward to be standing there at his own 
telephone in the privacy of his own room, as unbending 
as a steel girder. Time still moved, he saw. The hand on 
the big clock above the phone had just shifted from 3:30 
to 3:31. 

Sweat rivered down his back as he struggled to put 
down the phone. He fought to lift his left foot. He 
strained to twitch his right eyelid. No go on all counts; 
he was frozen, all but his chest muscles — thank goodness 
for that. 

Several minutes later, matters became even more 
awkward when his front door, which had been locked, 
opened abruptly. Three strangers entered. They looked 
oddly alike: a trio of Tweedledums, no more than five 
feet high, wide through the waist, jowly of face and 
balding of head, each wearing an inadequate 
single-breasted blue serge suit. 

A1 discovered he could roll his eyes. He rolled them. 
He wanted to apologize because his unexpected paralysis 
kept him from acting the proper part of a host, but his 
tongue would not obey. And on second thought, it 
occurred to him that the little bald men might be 
connected in some way with that paralysis. 

The reddest- faced of the three little men hung up the 
telephone and the stasis ended. A1 nearly folded up as the 
tension that gripped him broke. He said, “Just who the 
deuce — ” 

“We will ask the questions. You are A1 Miller?” 





MUGWUMP FOUR 



39 



Al nodded. 

“And obviously you are a Normal. So there has been 
a grave error. Mordecai, examine the telephone.” 

The second little man picked up the phone and 
calmly disemboweled it with three involved motions of 
his stubby hands. He frowned over the telephone’s 
innards for a moment; then, humming tunelessly, he 
produced a wire-clipper and severed the telephone cord. 

“Hold on here!” Al burst out. “You can’t just rip out 
my phone like that! You aren’t from the phone 
company!” 

“Quiet,” said the spokesman nastily. “Well, 
Mordecai?” 

The second little man said, “Probability 1 to 
1,000,000. The cranch interval overlapped and his 
telephone matrix slipped. His call was piped into our 
wire by error, Waldemar.” 

“So he isn’t a spy?” Waldemar asked. 

“Doubtful. As you see, he’s of rudimentary 
intelligence. His dialing our number was a statistical 
fluke.” 

“But now he knows about us,” said the third little 
man in a surprisingly deep voice. “I vote for 
demolecularization.” 

The other two whirled on their companion. “Always 
bloodthirsty, eh, Giovanni?” said Mordecai. “You’d 
violate the code at the snap of a meson.” 

“There won’t be any demolecularization while I’m in 
charge,” added Waldemar. 

“What do we do with him then?” Giovanni 
demanded. 

Mordecai said, “Freeze him and take him down to 
Headquarters. He’s their problem.” 

“1 think this has gone about as far as it’s going to 
go,” Al exploded at last. “However you three creeps got 
in here, you’d better get yourselves right out again, or — ” 

“Enough,” Waldemar said. 

Al felt his jaws stiffen. He realized bewilderedly that 
he was frozen again. And frozen, this time, with his 
mouth gaping foolishly open. 

The trip took about five minutes, and so far as Al 
was concerned, it was one long blur. At the end of the 
journey, the blur lifted for an instant, long enough to 
give Al one good glimpse of his surroundings — a 
residential street in what might have been Brooklyn or 
Queens (or Cincinnati or Detroit, he thought morbidly) 
— before he was hustled into the basement of a 
two-family house. He found himself in a windowless, 
brightly lit chamber cluttered with complex-looking 
machinery and with a dozen or so alarmingly identical 
little bald-headed men. Not until then did his paralysis 
lift. 

The chubbiest of the bunch glared sourly at him and 
asked, “Are you a spy?” 

“I’m just an innocent bystander,” Al said earnestly. 
“I picked up my phone and started to dial, and all of a 
sudden some guy asked me if I was Operator Nine. 



Honest, that’s all.” 

“Overlapping of the cranch interval,” muttered 
Mordecai. “Slipped matrix.” 

“Umm. Unfortunate,” the chubby one commented. 
“We’ll have to dispose of him.” 

“Demolecularization is the best way,” Giovanni put 
in immediately. 

“Dispose of him humanely, I mean. It’s revolting to 
think of taking the life of an inferior being. But he 
simply can’t remain in this four-space any longer, not if 
he knows.” 

“But I don ’t know!” Al protested. “I couldn’t be any 
more mixed up if I tried! Won’t you please tell me — ” 
“Very well,” said the pudgiest one, who seemed to 
be the leader. “Waldemar, tell him about us.” 

Waldemar said, “You’re now in the local 
headquarters of a secret mutant group working for the 
overthrow of humanity as you know it. By some 
accident, you happened to dial our private 

communication exchange, MUtant 4 — ” 

“I thought it was MUgwump 4,” Al interjected. 

“The code name, naturally,” said Waldemar. “To 
continue: you channeled into our communication 

network. You now know too much. Your presence in this 
space-time nexus jeopardizes the success of our entire 
movement. Therefore we are forced — ” 

“ — to demolecularize — ” Giovanni began. 

“ — to dispose of you,” Waldemar continued sternly. 
“We’re humane beings — most of us — and we won’t do 
anything that would make you suffer. But you can’t stay 
in this area of space-time, can you?” 

Al shook his head dimly. These little potbellied men 
were mutants working for the overthrow of humanity? 
Well, he had no reason to think they were lying to him. 
The world was full of little potbellied men. Maybe they 
were all part of the secret organization. 

“Look,” he said, “I didn’t want to dial your number. 
It was all a silly accident. But I’m a fair guy. Let me get 
out of here and I’ll keep mum about the whole thing. 
You can go ahead and overthrow humanity, if that’s 
what you want to do. I promise not to interfere in any 
way. If you’re mutants, you ought to be able to look into 
my mind and see that I’m sincere — ” 

“We have no telepathic powers,” declared the 
chubby leader curtly. “If we had, there would be no need 
for a communications network in the first place. In the 
second place, your sincerity is not the issue. We have 
enemies. If you were to fall into their hands — ” 

“I won’t say a word! Even if they torture me — 
brainwash me — I swear I’ll keep quiet!” 

“No. At this stage in our campaign, we can take no 
risks. You’ll have to go. Prepare the temporal centrifuge, 
Mordecai.” 

Four of the little men, led by Mordecai, unveiled a 
complicated-looking device of the general size and shape 
of a concrete mixer. Waldemar and Giovanni showed Al 
toward the machine. It came rapidly to life: dials glowed, 



40 



GALAXY 



indicator needles teetered, loud buzzes and clicks 
implied readiness. 

A1 said nervously, “What are you going to do to 
me?” 

“This machine will hurl you forward in time,” 
Waldemar explained. “Too bad we have to rip you right 
out of your temporal matrix, but we’ve no choice. You’ll 
be well taken care of up ahead, though. No doubt, by the 
25th century, our kind will have taken over completely. 
You’ll be the last of the Normals. Practically a living 
fossil. You’ll love it. You’ll be a walking museum 
piece.” 

“Assuming the machine works,” Giovanni put in 
maliciously. “We don’t really know if it does, you see.” 

A1 gaped. They were busily strapping him to a cold 
copper slab in the heart of the machine. “You don’t even 
know if it works?" 

“Not really,” Waldemar admitted. “Present theory 
holds that time-travel works only one way — forward. 
So we haven’t been able to recover any of our test 
specimens and see how they reacted. Of course, they do 
vanish when the machine is turned on, so we know they 
must go somewhere .” 

“Oh,” A1 said weakly. 

He was trussed in thoroughly. Experimental 
wriggling of his right wrist showed him that. But even if 
he could get loose, these weird little men would only 
freeze him and put him into the machine again. 

His shoulders slumped resignedly. He wondered if 
anyone would miss him. The Friendly Finance 
Corporation certainly would. But since, in a sense, it was 
their fault he was in this mess now, he couldn’t get very 
upset about that. They could always sue his estate for the 
$300 he owed them, if his estate was worth that much. 

Nobody else was going to mind the disappearance of 
Albert Miller from the space-time continuum, he thought 
dourly. His parents were dead, he hadn’t seen his one 
sister in fifteen years, and the girl he used to know in 
Topeka was married and at last report had three kids. 

Still and all, he liked 1959. He wasn’t sure how he 
would take to the 25th century — or the 25th century to 
him. 

“Ready for temporal discharge,” Mordecai sang out. 

The chubby leader peered up at Al. “We’re sorry 
about all this, you understand. But nothing and nobody 
can be allowed to stand in the way of the Cause.” 

“Sure,” Al said. “I understand.” 

The concrete-mixer part of the machine began to 
revolve, bearing Al with it as it built up tempo-kinetic 
potential. Momentum increased alarmingly. In the 
background, Al heard an ominous droning sound that 
grew louder and louder, until it drowned out everything 
else. He heard a pop\ like the sound of a breaking 
balloon. 

It was the rupturing of the space-time continuum. Al 
Miller went hurtling forward along the four-space track, 
head first. He shut his eyes and hoped for the best. 



When the dizziness stopped, he found himself sitting 
in the middle of an impeccably clean, faintly yielding 
roadway, staring up at the wheels of vehicles swishing 
by overhead at phenomenal speeds. After a moment or 
two more, he realized they were not airborne, but simply 
automobiles racing along an elevated roadway made of 
some practically invisible substance. 

So the temporal centrifuge had worked! 

Al glanced around. A crowd was collecting. A 
couple of hundred people had formed a big circle. They 
were pointing and muttering. Nobody approached closer 
than fifty or sixty feet. 

They weren’t potbellied mutants. Without exception, 
they were all straight-backed six-footers with full heads 
of hair. The women were tall, too. Men and women alike 
were dressed in a sort of tuniclike garment made of 
iridescent material that constantly changed colors. 

A gong began to ring, rapidly peaking in volume. Al 
scrambled to his feet and put on a tentative smile. 

“My name’s Miller. I come from 1959. Would 
somebody mind telling me what year this is, and — ” 

He was drowned out by two hundred voices 
screaming in terror. The crowd stampeded away, dashing 
madly in every direction, as if he were some ferocious 
monster. The gong continued to clang loudly. Cars 
hummed overhead. 

Al saw a squat, beetle-shaped black vehicle coming 
toward him on the otherwise empty road. The car pulled 
up half a block away, the top sprang open, and a figure 
clad in what might have been a driver’s suit — or a 
spacesuit — stepped out and advanced toward Al. 

“Dozzinon murrifar volan,” the armored figure 
called out. 

“No speak,” Al replied. “I’m a stranger here.” 

To his dismay, he saw the other draw something 
shaped like a weapon and point it at him. Al’s hands shot 
immediately into the air. A globe of bluish light exuded 
from the broad nozzle of the gun, hung suspended for a 
moment, and drifted toward Al. He dodged uneasily to 
one side, but the globe of light followed him, descended, 
and wrapped itself around him. 

It was like being on the inside of a soap-bubble. He 
could see out, though distortedly. He touched the curving 
side of the globe in a cautious way; it was resilient and 
springy to the touch, but his finger did not go through. 

He noticed with some misgiving that his bubble-cage 
was starting to drift off the ground. It trailed a ropelike 
extension, which the man in the armored suit deftly 
grabbed and knotted to the rear bumper of his car. He 
drove quickly away — with Al, bobbing in his 
impenetrable bubble of light, tagging helplessly along 
like a captured Gaul being dragged through the streets of 
Rome behind a chariot — but several feet in the air. 

He got used to the irregular motion after a while and 
relaxed enough to be able to study his surroundings. He 
was passing through a remarkably antiseptic-looking 
city, free from refuse and dust. Towering buildings, all 



MUGWUMP FOUR 



41 



bright and spankingly new-looking, shot up everywhere. 
People goggled at him from the safety of the pedestrian 
walkways as he jounced past. 

After about ten minutes, the car halted outside an 
imposing building whose facade bore the words Istfaq 
Barnoll. Three men in armored suits appeared from 
within to flank Al’s captor as a kind of honor guard. A1 
was borne within. 

He was nudged gently into a small room on the 
ground floor. The door rolled shut behind him and 
seemed to join the rest of the wall; no division-line was 
apparent. A moment later, the balloon popped open, and 
just in time, too; the air had been getting quite stale 
inside it. 

A1 glanced around. A square window opened in the 
wall and three grim-faced men peered intently at him 
from an adjoining cubicle. 

A voice from a speaker grid above Al’s head said, 
“Murrifar althrosk?” 

“A1 Miller, from the 20th century. And it wasn’t my 
idea to come here, believe me.” 

“Durberal haznik? Quittimar?” 

A1 shrugged. “No parley-voo. Honest, I don’t 
savvy.” 

His three interrogators conferred among themselves 
— taking what seemed to A1 the needless precaution of 
switching off the mike to prevent him from overhearing 
their deliberations. 

He saw one of the men leave the observation cubicle. 
When the man returned, some five minutes later, he 
brought with him a tall, gloomy- looking man wearing an 
impressive spade-shaped beard. 

The mike was turned on again. Spadebeard said 
rumblingly, “How be thou hight?” 

“Eh?” 

“An thou reck the King’s tongue, I conjure thee 
speak!” 

A1 grinned. No doubt they had fetched an expert in 
dead languages to talk to him. “Right language, but the 
wrong time. I’m from the 20th century, not the tenth. 
Come forward a ways.” 

Spadebeard paused to change mental gears. “A 
thousand pardons — I mean sorry. Wrong idiom. Dig me 
now?” 

“1 follow you. What year is this?” 

“It is 243 1 . And from whence be you?” 

“You don’t quite have it straight yet, but I’m from 
1959.” 

“And how came you hither?” 

“I wish I knew,” A1 said. “I was just trying to phone 
the loan company, see? Anyway, I got involved with 
these little fat guys who wanted to take over the world. 
Mutants, they said they were. And they decided they had 
to get rid of me, so they bundled me into their time 
machine and shot me forward. So I’m here.” 

“A spy of the mutated ones, eh?” 

“Spy? Who said anything about a spy? Talk about 



jumping to conclusions! I’m — ” 

“You have been sent by them to wreak mischief 
among us. No transparent story of yours will deceive us. 
You are not the first to come to our era, you know. And 
you will meet the same fate the others met.” 

A1 shook his head foggily. “Look here, you’re 
making a big mistake. I’m not a spy for anybody. And I 
don’t want to get involved in any war between you and 
the mutants — ” 

“The war is over. The last of the mutated ones was 
exterminated 50 years ago.” 

“Okay, then. What can you fear from me? Honest, I 
don’t want to cause any trouble. If the mutants are wiped 
out, how could my spying help them?” 

“No action in time and space is ever absolute. In our 
fourspace, the mutants are eradicated — but they lurk 
elsewhere, waiting for their chance to enter and spread 
destruction. ” 

Al’s brain was swimming. “Let’s let that pass. I’m 
not a spy. I just want to be left alone. Let me settle down 
here somewhere — put me on probation, show me the 
ropes, stake me to a few credits, or whatever you use for 
money here. I won’t make any trouble.” 

“Your body teems with micro-organisms Of diseases 
long extinct in this world. Only the fact that we were 
able to confine you in a force-bubble almost as soon as 
you arrived here saved us from a terrible epidemic of 
ancient diseases.” 

“A couple of injections, that’s all, and you can kill 
any bacteria on or in me,” A1 pleaded. “You’re advanced 
people. You ought to be able to do a simple thing like 
that.” 

“And then there is the matter of your genetic 
structure,” Spadebeard continued inexorably. “You bear 
genes long since eliminated from humanity as 
undesirable. Permitting you to remain here, breeding 
furtively, would introduce unutterable confusion. 
Perhaps you carry latently the same mutant strain that 
cost humanity so many centuries of bloodshed!” 

“No,” A1 protested. “Look at me. I’m pretty tall, no 
potbelly, a full head of hair — ” 

“The gene is recessive. But it crops up 
unexpectedly.” 

“I solemnly promise to control my breeding,” A! 
declared. “I won’t run around scattering my genes all 
over your shiny new world. That’s a promise.” 

“Your appeal is rejected,” came the inflexible reply. 
A1 shrugged. He knew when he was beaten. “Okay,” 
he said wearily. “I didn’t want to live in your damn 
century anyway. When’s the execution?” 

“ Execution ?” Spadebeard looked stunned. “Dove’s 
whiskers, do you think we would — would actually — ” 

He couldn’t get the word out. 

Al supplied it: “Put me to death?” 

Spadebeard’s expression was sickly. He looked 
ready to retch. Al heard him mutter vehemently to his 
companions in the observation cubicle: “Gonnim def 



42 



GALAXY 



larrimog! Egfar!” 

“Murrifar althrosk,” suggested one of his 
companions. 

Spadebeard, evidently reassured, nodded. He said to 
Al, “No doubt a barbarian like yourself would expect to 
be — to be made dead.” Gulping, he went gamely on. 
“We have no such vindictive intention.” 

“Well, what are you going to do to me?” 

“Send you across the timeline to a world where your 
friends, the mutated ones, reign supreme,” Spadebeard 
replied. “It’s the least we can do for you, spy.” 

The hidden door of his cell puckered open. Another 
armor-suited figure entered, pointing a gun, and 
discharged a blob of blue light that drifted toward Al and 
rapidly englobed him. He was drawn by the trailing end 
out into a corridor. 

It hadn’t been a very sociable reception here in the 
25th century, he thought as he was tugged along the 
hallway. In a way, he couldn’t blame them. A 
time-traveler from the past was bound to be laden down 
with all sorts of germs. They couldn’t risk letting him 
run around breathing at everybody. No wonder that 
crowd of onlookers had panicked when he had opened 
his mouth to speak to them. 

The other business, though, that of his being a spy 
for the mutants — he couldn’t figure that out at all. If the 
mutants had been wiped out fifty years ago, why worry 
about spies now? At least his species had managed to 
defeat the underground organization of potbellied little 
men. That was comforting. He wished he could get back 
to 1959, if only to snap his fingers in their jowly faces 
and tell them that all their sinister scheming was going to 
come to nothing. 

Where was he heading now? Spadebeard had said, 
Across the timeline to a world where the mutated ones 
reign supreme. Whatever across the timeline meant, Al 
thought. 

He was ushered into an impressive laboratory room 
and, bubble and all, was thrust into the waiting clasps of 
something that looked depressingly like an electric chair. 
Brisk technicians bustled around, throwing switches and 
checking connections. 

Al glanced in appeal at Spadebeard. “Will you tell 
me what’s going on?” 

“It is very difficult to express in medieval terms,” 
the linguist said. “The device makes use of dollibar force 
to transmit you through an inverse dormin vector — do I 
make myself clear?” 

“Not very,” Al confessed. 

“Unhelpable. But you understand the concept of 
parallel continua at least, of course.” 

“No.” 

“Does it mean anything to you if I say that you’ll be 
shunted across the spokes of the time-wheel to a totality 
that is simultaneously parallel and tangent to our 
four-space?” 

“That isn’t much better,” Al said resignedly, for all 



he was really getting was a headache. “You might as 
well start shunting me, I suppose.” 

Spadebeard nodded and turned to a technician. 
“Vorstrar althrosk,” he commanded. 

“Murrifar.” 

The technician grabbed an immense toggle switch 
with both hands and groaningly dragged it shut. Al heard 
a brief whine of closing relays. Then darkness 
surrounded him. 

Once again he found himself on a city street. But the 
pavement was cracked and buckled, and grass blades 
poked up through the neglected concrete. 

A dry voice said, “All right, you. Don’t sprawl there 
like a ninny. Get up and come along.” 

Al peered doubtfully up into the snout of a 
fair-headed man. Four identical companions stood near 
him with arms folded. They all looked very much like 
Mordecai, Waldemar, Giovanni, and the rest, except that 
these mutants were decked out in futuristic-looking 
costumes bright with flashy gold trim and rocketship 
insignia. 

Al put up his hands. “Where am I?” he asked in 
confusion. 

“Earth, of course. You’ve just come through a 
dimensional gateway from the continuum of the 
Normals. Come along, spy. Into the van.” 

“But I’m not a spy,” Al mumbled without very much 
hope as the five little men bundled him into a blue and 
red car the size of a small yacht. “At least, I’m not 
spying on you. I mean — ” 

“Save the explanations for the Overlord,” was the 
curt instruction. 

Al huddled miserably cramped between two vigilant 
mutants, while the others sat behind him. The van moved 
seemingly of its own volition, and at an enormous rate. 
A mutant power, Al thought. After a while he said, 
“Could you at least tell me what year this is?” 

“Yes — 2431,” snapped the mutant to his left. 

“But that’s the same year it was over there." 
“Certainly. What else could it be?” 

The question floored Al. He was silent for perhaps 
half a mile more. Since the van had no windows, he 
stared morosely at his feet. 

Finally he asked, “How come you aren’t afraid of 
catching my germs then? Over back of — ah — the 
dimensional gateway, they kept me cooped up in a 
force-field all the time so 1 wouldn’t contaminate them. 
But you go right ahead breathing the same air I do.” 

“Do you think we fear the germs of a Normal, spy?” 
sneered the mutant at Al’s right. “You forget that we’re a 
superior race.” 

Al nodded. “Yes. I forgot about that.” 

The van halted suddenly and the mutant police 
hustled Al out, past a crowd of peering little fat men and 
women, and into a colossal dome of a building whose 
exterior was covered completely with faceted green 
glass. The effect was one of massive ugliness. 



MUGWUMP FOUR 



43 



They ushered him into a sort of throne room presided 
over by a mutant fatter than the rest. The policeman 
gripping Al’s right arm hissed, “Bow when you enter the 
presence of the Overlord.” 

A1 wasn’t minded to argue. He dropped to his knees 
along with the others. A booming voice from above rang 
out. “What have you brought me today?” 

“A spy. Your Nobility.” 

“Another? Rise, spy.” 

A1 rose. “Begging Your Nobility’s pardon. I’d like to 
put in a word or two on my own behalf — ” 

“Silence!” the Overlord roared. 

A1 closed his mouth. 

The mutant drew himself up to his full height, about 
five feet one, and said, “The Normals have sent you 
across the dimensional gulf to spy on us.” 

“No, Your Nobility. They were afraid I’d spy on 
them, so they sent me over here. I’m from the year 1959, 
you see.” Briefly, he explained everything, beginning 
with the bollixed phone call and ending with his capture 
by the Overlord’s men a short while ago. 

The Overlord looked skeptical. “It is well known that 
the Normals plan to cross the dimensional gulf from 
their phantom world to this, the real one, and invade our 
civilization. You’re but the latest of their advance scouts. 
Admit it!” 

“No, Your Nobility, I’m not. On the other side, they 
told me I was a spy from 1959, and now you say I’m a 
spy from the other dimension. But I tell you — ” 

“Enough!” the mutant leader thundered. “Take him 
away. Place him in custody. We shall decide his fate 
later!” 

Someone else already occupied the cell into which 
A1 was thrust. He was a lanky, sad-faced Normal who 
slouched forward to shake hands once the door had 
clanged shut. 

“Thurizad manifosk,” he said. 

“Sorry, I don’t speak that language,” said Al. 

The other grinned. “I understand. All right: 
greetings. I’m Darren Phelp. Are you a spy too?” 

“No, dammit!” Al snapped. Then: “Sorry. Didn’t 
mean to take it out on you. My name’s Al Miller. Are 
you a native of this place?” 

“Me? Dove’s whiskers, what a sense of humor! Of 
course I’m not a native! You know as well as 1 do that 
there aren’t any Normals left in this fourspace 
continuum.” 

“None at all?” 

“Hasn’t been one born here in centuries,” Phelp said. 
“But you’re just joking, eh? You’re from Baileffod’s 
outfit, I suppose.” 

“Who?” 

“Baileffod. Baileffod! You mean you aren’t? Then 
you must be from higher up!” Phelp thrust his hands 
sideways in some kind of gesture of respect. “Penguin’s 
paws. Excellency; I apologize. I should have seen at 
once — " 



“No, I’m not from your organization at all,” Al said. 
“I don’t know what you’re talking about. Word of 
honor.” 

Phelp smiled cunningly. “Of course, Excellency! I 
understand completely.” 

“Cut that out! Why doesn’t anyone ever believe me? 
I’m not from Baileffod and I’m not from higher up. I 
come from 1959. Do you hear me — 1959? And that’s 
the truth.” 

Phelp’s eyes went wide. “From the past?' 1 ' 

Al nodded. “I stumbled into the mutants in 1959 and 
they shipped me five centuries ahead to get rid of me. 
Only when I arrived, I wasn’t welcome, so I was shipped 
across the dimensional whatzis to here. Everyone thinks 
I’m a spy, wherever I go. What are you doing here?” 
Phelp smiled. “Why, I am a spy.” 

“From 2431?” 

“Naturally. We have to keep tabs on the mutants 
somehow. I came through the gateway wearing an 
invisibility shield, but it popped an ultrone and I vizzed 
out. They jugged me last month and I suppose I’m stuck 
in this place for keeps.” 

Al rubbed thumbs tiredly against his eyeballs. “Wait 
a minute — how come you speak my language? On the 
other side, they had to get hold of a linguistics expert to 
talk to me.” 

“All spies are trained to talk English,” said Phelp. 
“That’s the language the mutants speak here. In the real 
world, we speak Vorkish, naturally. It’s the language 
developed by Normals for communication during the 
Mutant Wars. Your ‘linguistics expert’ was probably one 
of our top spies.” 

“And over here the mutants have won?” 

“Completely. Three hundred years ago, in this 
continuum, the mutants developed a two-way time 
machine that enabled them to go back and forth, 
eliminating Normal leaders before they were born. 
Whereas in our world, the real world, two-way time 
travel is impossible. That’s where the continuum split 
begins. We Normals fought a grim war of extermination 
against the mutants in our four-space and finally wiped 
them out, despite their superior powers, in 2390. Clear?” 
“More or less.” Rather less than more, Al added 
privately. “So there are only mutants in this world, and 
there are only Normals in your world.” 

“Exactly!” 

“And you’re a spy from the other side.” 

“You’ve got it now! You see even though, strictly 
speaking, this world is only a phantom, it’s got some 
pretty real characteristics. For instance, if the mutants 
killed you here, you’d be dead. Permanently. So there’s a 
lot of rivalry across the gateway; the mutants are always 
scheming to invade us, and vice versa. Confidentially, I 
don’t think anything will ever come of all the scheming.” 
“You don’t?” 

“Nah,” Phelp said. “The way things stand now, each 
side has a perfectly good enemy just beyond reach. But 



44 



GALAXY 



actually going to war would be messy, while relaxing our 
guard and allowing peace to break out would foul up our 
economy. So we keep sending spies back and forth, and 
prepare for war. It’s a nice system, except when you 
happen to get yourself caught, like me.” 

“What’ll happen to you?” 

Phelp shrugged. “They may let me rot here for a few 
decades. Or they might decide to condition me and send 
me back as a spy for them. Tiger tails, who could 
know?” 

“Would you change sides like that?” 

“I wouldn’t have any choice — not after I was 
conditioned,” Phelp said. “But I don’t worry much about 
it. It’s a risk I knew about when I signed on for spy 
duty.” 

A1 shuddered. It was beyond him how someone 
could voluntarily let himself get involved in this game of 
dimension-shifting and mutant-battling. But it takes all 
sorts to make a continuum, he philosophically decided. 

Half an hour later, three rotund mutant police came 
to fetch him. They marched him downstairs and into a 
bare, ugly little room where a battery of interrogators 
quizzed him for better than an hour. He stuck to his 
story, throughout everything, until at last they indicated 
they were through with him. 

He spent the next two hours in a drafty cell, by 
himself, until finally a gaudily robed mutant unlocked 
the door and said, “The Overlord commands you to 
present yourself.” 

The Overlord looked worried. He leaned forward on 
his throne, fist digging into his fleshy chin. In his 
booming voice — A1 realized at last that it was 
artificially amplified — the Overlord rumbled, “Miller, 
you’re a problem .” 

“I’m sorry, YourNobil — ” 

“Quiet! I’ll do the talking.” 

A1 did not reply. 

The Overlord went on, “We’ve checked your story 
inside and out, and confirmed it with one of our spies on 
the other side of the gate. You really are from 1959, or 
thereabouts. What can we do with you? Generally 
speaking, when we catch a Normal snooping around 
here, we psycho-condition him and send him back across 
the gateway to spy for us. But we can’t do that to you, 
because you don’t belong on the other side, and they’ve 
already tossed you out once. On the other hand, we can’t 
keep you here, maintaining you forever at state expense. 
And it wouldn’t be civilized to kill you, would it?” 

“No, Your Nobil— ” 

“Silencer 
A1 gulped. 

The Overlord glowered at him and continued 
thinking out loud. “I suppose we could perform 
experiments on you, though. You must be a walking 
laboratory of Normal microorganisms that we could 
synthesize and fire through the gateway when we invade 
their fourspace. Yes, by the Gnome, then you’d be useful 



to our cause! Zechariah?” 

“Yes, Nobility?” A ribbon-bedecked guardsman 
snapped to attention. 

“Take this Normal to the biological laboratories for 
examination. I’ll have further instructions as soon as — ” 

A1 heard a peculiar whanging noise from the back of 
the throne room. The Overlord appeared to freeze on his 
throne. Turning, A1 saw a band of determined- looking 
Normals come bursting in, led by Darren Phelp. 

“There you are!” Phelp cried. “I’ve been looking all 
over for you!” He was waving a peculiar needle-nozzled 
gun. 

“What’s going on?” A1 gasped. 

Phelp grinned. “The invasion! It came, after all! Our 
troops are pouring through the gateway armed with these 
freezer guns. They immobilize any mutant who gets in 
the way of the field.” 

“When — when did all this happen?” 

“ft started two hours ago. We’ve captured the entire 
city! Come on, will you? Whiskers, there’s no time to 
waste!” 

“Where in blazes am I supposed to go?” 

Phelp smiled. “To the nearest dimensional lab, of 
course. We’re going to send you back to your own time.” 

A dozen triumphant Normals stood in a tense knot 
around A1 in the laboratory. From outside came the 
sound of jubilant singing. The invasion was a howling 
success. 

As Phelp had explained it, the victory was due to the 
recent invention of a kind of time-barrier projector. The 
projector had cut off all contact between the mutant 
world and its own future, preventing time-traveling 
mutant scouts from getting back to 2431 with news of 
the invasion. With two-way travel, the great mutant 
advantage, thus nullified, the success of the surprise 
attack was made possible — and easy. 

A1 listened to this explanation with minimal interest. 
He barely understood every third word, and, in any 
event, his main concern was in getting home. 

He was strapped into a streamlined and much 
modified version of the temporal centrifuge that had 
originally hurled him forward into 2431. 

Phelps explained things to him. “You see here, we 
set the machine for 1959. What day was it when you 
left? And how close can you get to the moment?” 

“Ah — October 10. It was exactly 3:30 in the 
afternoon.” 

“Make the setting, Frozz.” Phelp nodded. “You’ll be 
shunted back along the time-line. Of course, you’ll land 
in this continuum, since in our world there’s no such 
thing as pastward time travel. But once you reach your 
own time, all you do is activate this small 
transdimensional generator, and you’ll be hurled across 
safe and sound into the very day you left, in your own 
fourspace.” 

“You can’t know how much I appreciate all this,” Al 
said very warmly. 



MUGWUMP FOUR 



43 



He felt a pleasant glow of love for all mankind, for 
the first time since his unhappy phone call. At last 
someone was taking sympathetic interest in his plight. At 
last he was on his way home, back to the relative sanity 
of 1959, where he could start forgetting this entire 
nightmarish jaunt. Mutants and Normals and spies and 
time machines .... 

“You’d better get going,” Phelp said. “We have to 
get the occupation under way here.” 

“Sure,” A1 agreed. “Don’t let me hold you up. I can’t 
wait to get going — no offense intended.” 

“And remember, soon as your surroundings look 
familiar, jab the activator button on this generator. 
Otherwise you’ll slither into an interspace where we 
couldn’t answer for the consequences.” 

Al nodded tensely. “I won’t forget.” 

“I hope not. Ready?” 

“Ready.” 

Someone threw a switch. Al began to spin. He heard 
the popping sound that was the rupturing of the temporal 
matrix. Like a cork shot from a champagne bottle, Al 
arched out backward through time, heading for 1959. 

He woke in his own room on 23rd Street. His head 
hurt. His mind was full of phrases like temporal 
centrifuge and transdimensional generator. 

He picked himself off the floor and rubbed his head. 

Wow, he thought. It must have been a sudden 
fainting spell. And now his head was crowded with 
nonsense. 

Going to the sideboard, he pulled out the half-empty 
bourbon bottle and measured off a few fingers’ worth. 

After the drink, his nerves felt steadier. His mind 
was still cluttered with inexplicable thoughts and images. 
Sinister little fat men and complex machines, transparent 
roadways in the air and men in fancy tunics. 

A bad dream, he thought. 

Then he remembered. It wasn’t any dream. He had 
actually taken the round trip into 2431, returning by way 
of some other continuum. 



GALAXY-Winner of four awards: K'ragah Zeedle (best novel) 
and Traag (novella, short-short and cover design) on Vega IV. 




He had pressed the generator button at the proper 
time, and now here he was, safe and sound. No longer 
the football of a bunch of different factions. Home in his 
own snug little fourspace, or whatever it was. 

He frowned. He recalled that Mordecai had severed 
the telephone wire. But the phone looked intact now. 
Maybe it had been fixed while he was gone. He picked it 
up. Unless he got that loan extension today, he was 
cooked. 

There was no need for him to look up the number of 
the Friendly Finance Corporation; he knew it all too 
well. He began to dial. MUrray Hill 4 — 

The receiver clicked queerly. A voice said, “Come 
in, Operator Nine. Operator Nine, do you read me?” 

Al’s jaw sagged. This is where I came in, he thought 
wildly. He struggled to put down the phone. But his 
muscles would not respond. It would be easier to bend 
the sun in its orbit than to break the path of the 
continuum. He heard his own voice say, “I didn’t want 
the operator. There must be something wrong with my 
phone if — ” 

“Just a minute. Who are you?” 

Al fought to break the contact. But he was hemmed 
away in a small corner of his mind while his voice went 
on, “I ought to ask you that. What are you doing on the 
other end, anyway? I hadn’t even finished dialing. I got 
as far as MU-4 and — ” 

“Well? You dialed MUgwump 4 and you got us. 
What more do you want?” A suspicious pause. “Say, you 
aren’t Operator Nine!” 

Inwardly, Al wanted to scream. No scream would 
come. In this continuum, the past (his future) was 
immutable. He was caught on the track, and there was no 
escape. None whatever. And, he realized in frozen 
horror, there never would be. 

—ROBERT SILVERBERG 




liked Ary \ you'll like Einert. 

Gl ass sculpture bq 

Mark Einert 

Cataloq available 

1 - 800 - 869-0658 

Perfume Bailie, Uue, 9 in. $99. 





46 



GALAXY 




THE TEMPTATION 
OF HARRINGAY 

By SARAH ZETTEL 

Illustrated by Tom X 

ook, if you’re going to get like that, Mr. Harringay, 
I’m out of here. And taking the painting with me. 
I’m just telling you what she said. 

I told you, I went to art school with her. We did 
anatomy together. Oh, stop with the look. Well, so? I can 
tell you, she’s said plenty about her-cousin-the- 
gallery-owner and you probably wouldn’t like any of it. 

I just went to her studio to say ‘hi,’ and there she 
was, with this. I was coming to New York anyway, and I 
told her I’d take it here for her. She was too broke to get 
a ticket herself. 

Brilliant isn’t it? Those colors, and that’s what I call 
seamless brushwork. It really does seem to move, 
especially around the eyes. Yeah, I know. Nobody would 
have thought she had it in her, me included, and I’ve had 
my eye on her for awhile. 

She said it happened at the Art Fair. I mean, even 
you’ve heard of Ann Arbor’s Art Fair. It’s one of the 
biggest in the country. Stretches out for blocks and 
you’ve got to get past a jury to be allowed to set up your 
booth and show your stuff. Well, she was down on Main 
Street, looking at booth after booth of the best work in 
the country, and getting depressed. Then, she saw this 
old homeless guy standing behind these stalls full of 
expensive artistic and intellectual excesses and just 
ving at them all. She had her camera with her and gave 



the guy ten bucks to take his picture. 

“Stare at the booths, like you’re hungry. Don’t smile, 
either. Look miserable.” 

I don’t think the part called for much acting ability. 

Anyway, she snaps some shots from different angles, 
gets them developed at one of those twenty-four hour 
places and takes them back to her studio. Well, studio is 
maybe a bit much. Her space with the east-facing 
window in one of those fire-trap houses they carve up 
and rent out to the students one room at a time. She 
opens a fresh bottle of scotch and gets started. 

After about six hours and a third of the bottle, she 
says, it was getting pretty obvious inspiration had just 
blown her off again. She got a mediocre portrait of a 
homeless, shabby, old black guy. 

“I mean, it’s been done.” She stood back and 
glowered at it. “Totally done. Politically correct scenes 
of urban poverty are just out. It’s the nineties. Cynicism. 
World-weariness. Violence.” She painted a gun in the 
old guy’s fist. 

“No. Too blunt.” She scraped the gun off. “Subtlety. 
Maturity. Can’t hack around like a kid fresh out of art 
school.” 

Yeah, I know she is and you know she is, but she’s 
in deep denial about it. 

She says that’s when she set to work on the face. 
“Resentment,” she said. “That’s the ticket. Indignation at 
the thoughtless oppressor. Yeah 

No, 1 don’t think she got those eyes right away. 
Maybe the brows, angled and sharp like that. I think the 
eyes probably came last. 

Anyway, never mind what eventually happened, 
right then she says she didn’t feel like she was getting 





THE TEMPTATION OF HARRIGAY 



47 



anywhere. The mood of the piece, she says, eluded her. I 
think it fell into the scotch, but hey, what do I know? She 
fiddled around with it for hours, she says, changing the 
brows, working on the mouth, the chin, the eyes, 
between liberal doses from the bottle. 

She kept at it until it got dark and she switched on 
the lights. Cheap, ordinary lights from K-Mart, she says, 
no good to paint by. She kept on working anyway. But 
the righteous indignation just didn’t turn up. Now he just 
looked like a mean, shabby old black guy. 

This is where it gets weird. She said she got this 
feeling like the old guy was fighting her. Like his face 
was shifting under her brush, turning this way and that to 
get away from her. Finally, she got so pissed off that she 
just jammed the brush down into the blob of Morning 
Red No. 4 and drew it back and went, thwak! Left a 
huge, scarlet blob across the old guy’s mouth. 

She was real damn surprised when he reached up and 
wiped it off. 

“Well if you’re gonna be that way about it . .” He 
spat red acrylic. 

The scotch, she said, stopped her from thinking 
about the whole thing too much. “It’s your fault,” she 
said, brandishing the brush at the Old Guy. “Where’s the 
righteous indignation? Come on, shape up!” 

He rolled his eyes. “Oh, please. Look, chick-a-boo, 
you know about as much about righteous indignation as 
you do about quantum mechanics. You ain’t suffered 
anything worse than a hangover your whole life, Little 
Girl. How do you expect to paint the result of suffering?” 

“Shut your face!” she shouted and chucked another 
brush full of paint at the Old Guy. 

He wiped it away, fast. He had to, she said, acrylics 
dry pretty quick. 

“On top of that,” he said, shaking red globs off his 
hands so they splattered on the pavement. “Artists don’t 
just suffer, Sister. They see. They got eyes in their souls. 
They know what’s really going on.” He walked towards 
her then, filling the canvas. It was like a camera easing in 
for a close up. “You, you got suburban princess blinders 
on.” 

She says she’s pretty sure she turned purple at that. 
She felt her ears burn. 

“Now, I,” the Old Guy’s eyes sparkled, “am in a 
position to remove those blinders for you. I can 
guarantee you a masterpiece. One that will be 
acknowledged as a masterpiece in your lifetime, too. 
And all it will cost you is . .” 

“Oh, please.” She planted both hands on her hips, 
with the brush sticking out and dropping Morning Red 
on the carpet. “You don’t expect me to give you my soul 
for one lousy painting?” 

Yeah, you’re right, that must have been amazingly 
good scotch. I mean, I can’t even think what Hell would 
want with another artist’s soul. If this is their best 
approach, what they really need down there would be 
people with business skills. 

So, she says, the Old Guy pulled back a little. 



“’Course not. I know about inflation. Two paintings. 
Two masterpieces. Guaranteed.” 

“Go to hell.” She slashed the brush across the 
canvas, pinning down one of the old guy’s arms behind a 
ragged bar of Morning Red. 

Well, he pried himself free, and the fight was on. She 
was beyond furious. The Old Guy shouldn’t have called 
her names while she was plastered. Your cousin is a 
mean drunk. I mean, ladylike doesn’t enter her 
vocabulary under good circumstances, but after a good 
chunk of a fifth .... 

The Old Guy’s shouting variations on “guaranteed 
masterpieces!” and she’s attacking with the whole pallet. 
Blobs of Morning Red No. 4. Smears of Burnt Sienna 
No. 12. Murderous slashes of City Indigo No. 27. Lucky 
for the Old Guy she was completely blitzed and her aim 
was lousy. He kept dodging. He clawed frantically at the 
acrylic when she did actually manage to land one. 
Finally, she caught his foot with a big goober of After 
Hours Amethyst 15. He pulled loose with this long, 
sucking noise. 

“Five!” he shouted. “Five masterpieces, fame for 
your whole life! Interviews on MTV! All for your soul! 
Come on! It’s not like you’re using it for anything!” 

She got him across the mouth with a fresh load of 
City Indigo. 

The thing was, the Old Guy could move like a bat 
out of hell (her simile, not mine) and she’d repainted him 
so many times that he was even thicker than the gobs she 
was laying on him. 

But finally, inspiration worked its way past the 
alcohol. She snatched up the sauerkraut jar of turpentine 
and with a move that would’ve done Dorothy proud, 
splashed the whole load of it across the Old Guy’s body. 

His torso slumped and slouched and melted away in 
rivulets. 

“Now, you bastard . .” She flicked fresh streaks of 
color straight into his open mouth, and across what was 
left of his arms, muzzling him and trapping him in place. 
With hands about as substantial as watered Coke, he 
couldn’t wipe the smears away. 

She kept on going until she passed out cold. 

That’s when I came in. I sobered her up and talked 
her into letting me take the picture to you. 

Yeah, I know. It is incredible isn’t it? The way she 
got him to writhe like that. He really seems to be 
struggling against his meaningless bonds. It’s beyond 
fresh. It’s totally new. 

Oh, yeah, I’m sure she can do more just as good. 
And she’d probably be glad to let you organize the show. 
Keep it all in the family and all that. Oh yea, 1 know the 
art world. A show of that caliber would give this little 
place a boost all the way into orbit, especially with a 
wheeler-dealer like you behind it. 

My only question is, what would you be willing to 
give us for it? 



—SARAH ZETTEL 



48 



GALAXY 




OLD RAMBLING 
HOUSE 

By FRANK HERBERT 

Illustrated by Heywood 

n his last night on Earth, Ted Graham stepped out 
II ♦ 1 of a glass-walled telephone booth, and ducked to 
avoid a swooping moth that battered itself in a 
frenzy against a bare globe above the booth. 

Ted Graham was a long-necked man with a head of 
pronounced egg shape topped by prematurely balding 
sandy hair. Something about his lanky, intense 
appearance suggested his occupation: certified public 
accountant. 

He stopped behind his wife, who was studying a 
newspaper classified page, and frowned. “They said to 
wait here. They’ll come get us. Said the place is hard to 
find at night.” 

Martha Graham looked up from the newspaper. She 
was a dollfaced woman, heavily pregnant, a kind of pink 
prettiness about her. The yellow glow from the light 
above the booth subdued the red auburn cast of her 
ponytail hair. 

“I just have to be in a house when the baby’s born,” 
she said. “What’d they sound like?” 

“I dunno. There was a funny kind of interruption — 
like an argument in some foreign language.” 

“Did they sound foreign?” 

“In a way.” He motioned along the night-shrouded 



line of trailers toward one with two windows glowing 
amber. “Let’s wait inside. These bugs out here are 
fierce.” 

“Did you tell them which trailer is ours?” 

“Yes. They didn’t sound at all anxious to look at it. 
That’s odd — them wanting to trade their house for a 
trailer.” 

“There’s nothing odd about it. They’ve probably just 
got itchy feet like we did.” 

He appeared not to hear her. “Funniest-sounding 
language you ever heard when that argument started — 
like a squirt of noise.” 

Inside the trailer, Ted Graham sat down on the green 
couch that opened into a double bed for company. 

“They could use a good tax accountant around here,” 
he said. “When I first saw the place, I got that definite 
feeling. The valley looks prosperous. It’s a wonder 
nobody’s opened an office here before.” 

His wife took a straight chair by the counter 
separating kitchen and living area, folded her hands 
across her heavy stomach. 

“I’m just continental tired of wheels going around 
under me,” she said. “I want to sit and stare at the same 
view for the rest of my life. I don’t know how a trailer 
ever seemed glamorous when — ” 

“It was the inheritance gave us itchy feet,” he said. 

Tires gritted on gravel outside. 

Martha Graham straightened. “Could that be them?” 

“Awful quick, if it is.” He went to the door, opened 
it, stared down at the man who was just raising a hand to 
knock. 

“Are you Mr. Graham?” asked the man. 



OLD RAMBLING HOUSE 



49 



“Yes.” He found himself staring at the caller. 

“I’m Clint Rush. You called about the house?” The 
man moved farther into the light. At first, he’d appeared 
an old man, fine wrinkle lines in his face, a tired leather 
look to his skin. But as he moved his head in the light, 
the wrinkles seemed to dissolve — and with them, the 
years lifted from him. 

“Yes, we called,” said Ted Graham. He stood aside. 
“Do you want to look at the trailer now?” 

Martha Graham crossed to stand beside her husband. 
“We’ve kept it in awfully good shape,” she said. “We’ve 
never let anything get seriously wrong with it.” 

She sounds too anxious, thought Ted Graham. I wish 
she ’d let me do the talking for the two of us. 

“We can come back and look at your trailer 
tomorrow in daylight,” said Rush. “My car’s right out 
here, if you’d like to see our house.” 

Ted Graham hesitated. He felt a nagging worry tug 
at his mind, tried to fix his attention on what bothered 
him. 

“Hadn’t we better take our car?” he asked. “We 
could follow you.” 

“No need,” said Rush. “We’re coming back into 
town tonight anyway. We can drop you off then.” 

Ted Graham nodded. “Be right with you as soon as I 
lock up.” 

Inside the car, Rush mumbled introductions. His 
wife was a dark shadow in the front seat, her hair drawn 
back in a severe bun. Her features suggested gypsy 
blood. He called her Raimee. 

Odd name, thought Ted Graham. And he noticed that 
she, too, gave that strange first impression of age that 
melted in a shift of light. 

Mrs. Rush turned her gypsy features toward Martha 
Graham. “You are going to have a baby?” 

It came out as an odd, veiled statement. 

Abruptly, the car rolled forward. 

Martha Graham said, “It’s supposed to be born in 
about two months. We hope it’s a boy.” 

Mrs. Rush looked at her husband. “I have changed 
my mind,” she said. 

Rush spoke without taking his attention from the 
road. “It is too . ...” He broke off, spoke in a tumble of 
strange sounds. 

Ted Graham recognized it as the language he’d 
heard on the telephone. 

Mrs. Rush answered in the same tongue, anger 
showing in the intensity of her voice. Her husband 
replied, his voice calmer. 

Presently, Mrs. Rush fell moodily silent. 

Rush tipped his head toward the rear of the car. “My 
wife has moments when she does not want to get rid of 
the old house. It has been with her for many years.” 

Ted Graham said, “Oh.” Then: "Are you Spanish?” 
Rush hesitated. “No. We are Basque.” 

He turned the car down a well-lighted avenue that 
merged into a highway. They turned onto a side road. 
There followed more turns — left, right, right. 



Ted Graham lost track. 

They hit a jolting bump that made Martha gasp. 

“I hope that wasn’t too rough on you,” said Rush. 
“We’re almost there.” 

The car swung into a lane, its lights picking out the 
skeleton outlines of trees: peculiar trees — tall, gaunt, 
leafless. They added to Ted Graham’s feeling of 
uneasiness. 

The lane dipped, ended at a low wall of a house — 
red brick with clerestory windows beneath overhanging 
eaves. The effect of the wall and a wide-beamed door 
they could see to the left was ultra-modern. 

Ted Graham helped his wife out of the car, followed 
the Rushes to the door. 

“I thought you told me it was an old house,” he said. 

“It was designed by one of the first modernists,” said 
Rush. He fumbled with an odd curved key. The wide 
door swung open onto a hallway equally wide, carpeted 
by a deep pile rug. They could glimpse floor-to-ceiling 
view windows at the end of the hall, city lights beyond. 

Martha Graham gasped, entered the hall as though in 
a trance. Ted Graham followed, heard the door close 
behind them. 

“It’s so-so-so big,” exclaimed Martha Graham. 

“You want to trade this for our trailer?” asked Ted 
Graham. 

“It’s too inconvenient for us,” said Rush. “My work 
is over the mountains on the coast.” He shrugged. “We 
cannot sell it.” 

Ted Graham looked at him sharply. “Isn’t there any 
money around here?” He had a sudden vision of a tax 
accountant with no customers. 

“Plenty of money, but no real estate customers.” 

They entered the living room. Sectional divans lined 
the walls. Subdued lighting glowed from the corners. 
Two paintings hung on the opposite walls — oblongs of 
odd lines and twists that made Ted Graham dizzy. 

Warning bells clamored in his mind. 

Martha Graham crossed to the windows, looked at 
the lights far away below. “I had no idea we’d climbed 
that far,” she said. “It’s like a fairy city.” 

Mrs. Rush emitted a short, nervous laugh. 

Ted Graham glanced around the room, thought: If 
the rest of the house is like this, it ’s worth fifty or sixty 
thousand. He thought of the trailer: A good one, but not 
worth more than seven thousand. 

Uneasiness was like a neon sign flashing in his mind. 
“This seems so . ...” He shook his head. 

“Would you like to see the rest of the house?” asked 
Rush. 

Martha Graham turned from the window. “Oh, yes.” 

Ted Graham shrugged. No harm in looking, he 
thought. 

When they returned to the living room, Ted Graham 
had doubled his previous estimate on the house’s value. 
His brain reeled with the summing of it: a solarium with 



50 



GALAXY 



an entire ceiling covered by sun lamps, an automatic 
laundry where you dropped soiled clothing down a 
chute, took it washed and ironed from the other end .... 

“Perhaps you and your wife would like to discuss it 
in private,” said Rush. “We will leave you for a 
moment.” 

And they were gone before Ted Graham could 
protest. 

Martha Graham said, “Ted, I honestly never in my 
life dreamed — ” 

“Something’s very wrong, honey.” 

“But, Ted — ” 

“This house is worth at least a hundred thousand 
dollars. Maybe more. And they want to trade this — ” 
he looked around him — ” for a seven-thousand-dollar 
trailer?” 

“Ted, they’re foreigners. And if they’re so foolish 
they don’t know the value of this place, then why should 

95 

“I don’t like it,” he said. Again he looked around the 
room, recalled the fantastic equipment of the house. “But 
maybe you’re right.” 

He stared out at the city lights. They had a lacelike 
quality: tall buildings linked by lines of flickering 
incandescence. Something like a Roman candle shot 
skyward in the distance. 

“Okay!” he said. “If they want to trade, let’s go push 
the deal . ” 

Abruptly, the house shuddered. The city lights 
blinked out. A humming sound filled the air. 

Martha Graham clutched her husband’s arm. “Ted! 
Wha — what was that?” 

“I dunno.” He turned. “Mr. Rush!” 

No answer. Only the humming. 

The door at the end of the room opened. A strange 
man came through it. He wore a short toga-like garment 
of gray, metallic cloth belted at the waist by something 
that glittered and shimmered through every color of the 
spectrum . An aura of coldness and power emanated from 
him — a sense of untouchable hauteur. 

He glanced around the room, spoke in the same 
tongue the Rushes had used. 

Ted Graham said, “I don’t understand you, mister.” 
The man put a hand to his flickering belt. Both Ted 
and Martha Graham felt themselves rooted to the floor, a 
tingling sensation vibrating along every nerve. 

Again the strange language rolled from the man’s 
tongue, but now the words were understood. 

“Who are you?” 

“My name’s Graham. This is my wife. What’s going 

59 

“How did you get here?” 

“The Rushes — they wanted to trade us this house 
for our trailer. They brought us. Now look, we — ” 
“What is your talent — your occupation?” 

“Tax accountant. Say! Why all these — ” 

“That was to be expected,” said the man. “Clever! 



Oh, excessively clever!” His hand moved again to the 
belt. “Now be very quiet. This may confuse you 
momentarily.” 

Colored lights filled both the Grahams’ minds. They 
staggered. 

“You are qualified,” said the man. “You will serve.” 
“Where are we?” demanded Martha Graham. 

“The coordinates would not be intelligible to you,” 
he said. “I am of the Rojac. It is sufficient for you to 
know that you are under Rojac sovereignty.” 

Ted Graham said, “But — ” 

“You have, in a way, been kidnapped. And the 
Raimees have fled to your planet — an unregistered 
planet.” 

“I’m afraid,” Martha Graham said shakily. 

“You have nothing to fear,” said the man. “You are 
no longer on the planet of your birth — nor even in the 
same galaxy.” He glanced at Ted Graham’s wrist. “That 
device on your wrist — it tells your local time?” 

“Yes.” 

“That will help in the search. And your sun — can 
you describe its atomic cycle?” 

Ted Graham groped in his mind for his science 
memories from school, from the Sunday supplements. “I 
can recall that our galaxy is a spiral like — ” 

“Most galaxies are spiral.” 

“Is this some kind of a practical joke?” asked Ted 
Graham. 

The man smiled, a cold, superior smile. “It is no 
joke. Now I will make you a proposition.” 

Ted nodded warily. “All right, let’s have the 
stinger.” 

“The people who brought you here were tax 
collectors we Rojac recruited from a subject planet. They 
were conditioned to make it impossible for them to leave 
their job untended. Unfortunately, they were clever 
enough to realize that if they brought someone else in 
who could do their job, they were released from their 
mental bonds. Very clever.” 

“But — ” 

“You may have their job,” said the man. “Normally, 
you would be put to work in the lower echelons, but we 
believe in meting out justice wherever possible. The 
Raimees undoubtedly stumbled on your planet by 
accident and lured you into this position without — ” 
“How do you know I can do their job?” 

“That moment of brilliance was an aptitude test. You 
passed. Well, do you accept?” 

“What about our baby?” Martha Graham worriedly 
wanted to know. 

“You will be allowed to keep it until it reaches the 
age of decision — about the time it will take the child to 
reach adult stature.” 

“Then what?” insisted Martha Graham. 

“The child will take its position in society — 
according to its ability.” 

“Will we ever see our child after that?” 



OLD RAMBLING HOUSE 



51 



“Possibly.” 

Ted Graham said, “What’s the joker in this?” 

Again the cold, superior smile. “You will receive 
conditioning similar to that which we gave the Raimees. 
And we will want to examine your memories to aid us in 
our search for your planet. It would be good to find a 
new inhabitable place.” 

“Why did they trap us like this?” asked Martha 
Graham. 

“It’s lonely work,” the man explained. “Your house 
is actually a type of space conveyance that travels along 
your collection route — and there is much travel to the 
job. And then — you will not have friends, nor time for 
much other than work. Our methods are necessarily 
severe at times.” 

“Travel?” Martha Graham repeated in dismay. 

“Almost constantly.” 

Ted Graham felt his mind whirling. And behind him, 
he heard his wife sobbing. 

The Raimees sat in what had been the Grahams’ 
trailer. 

“For a few moments, 1 feared he would not succumb 
to the bait,” she said. “I knew you could never overcome 
the mental compulsion enough to leave them there 
without their first agreeing.” 



Raimee chuckled. “Yes. And now I’m going to 
indulge in everything the Rojac never permitted. I’m 
going to write ballads and poems.” 

“And I’m going to paint,” she said. “Oh, the 
delicious freedom!” 

“Greed won this for us,” he said. “The long study of 
the Grahams paid off. They couldn’t refuse to trade.” 

“I knew they’d agree. The looks in their eyes when 
they saw the house! They both had . ” She broke off, 
a look of horror coming into her eyes. “One of them did 
not agree!” 

“They both did. You heard them.” 

“The baby?” 

He stared at his wife. “But — but it is not at the age 
of decision!” 

“In perhaps eighteen of this planet’s years, it will be 
at the age of decision. What then?” 

His shoulders sagged. He shuddered. “I will not be 
able to fight it off. I will have to build a transmitter, call 
the Rojac and confess!” 

“And they will collect another inhabitable place,” 
she said, her voice flat and toneless. 

“I’ve spoiled it,” he said. “I’ve spoiled it!” 

—FRANK HERBERT 



"The young warrior journeyed up the mountain and was initiated into the Great Mysteries..." 







now, $1# 



cam com# 









THE RADIANCE TECHNIQUE 






An ancient science of universal energy for your needs today - 
and for the rest of your life. 

A simple, proven, practical tool to unlock and fulfill your true potential 
for creativity - vitality - and radiant health on all levels. 



For information, call or write: 

Radiance Light and Power Co. 

(310) 285-3817 P.O. Box 17695, Beverly Hills, CA 90209 



52 



GALAXY 




SONGS OF THE SOUL 

By JACQUELINE F. FALKENHAN 

Illustrated by Rivera 



“th' 

}d\ 



octoree, pleeease,” screamed a tiny dark 
woman with light blue hair. For days now, 
she had been haunting his every move, 
keening her if onlys in his ear. If only she hadn’t left her 
child alone, if only she had called a neighbor. 

Tweed clad and lanky, Dr. Jean L’Espoir strode 
through the cluttered pseudo- Wild-West- 19th-Century 
street, ignoring the cries of the blue-haired woman, and 
stepping over the corpse of a male Caucasian, one of his 
recent patients. A fecal stench filled the air. 

The doctor had his own if onlys. If only he hadn’t 
fought with Aelia. Had she resented the hours he spent 
on what she called his “obsession”? If only he had 
simply ignored her opinion. But Aelia was always 
difficult to ignore and impossible to forget for more than 
a couple of hours. 

L’Espoir walked faster. The woman caught up with 
him. 

“Doctoree,” she said in her unrecognizable accent, a 
bit out of breath. Suddenly she noticed the nearest corpse 
was missing four fingers — apparently chopped off after 
death by the fire ax lying nearby. Any rings were long 
gone. 



“Ohhh,” she moaned. Her dark face seemed to drain 
of blood. Her hands plucked nervously at her blue paper 
overalls. 

“The answer is the same today, Ms. Sunde, as it was 
yesterday,” the doctor said as he picked up the bloody ax 
and wiped its dull blade with a pocket handkerchief. 

He tried not to think about the dozens of corpses that 
daily littered this world, about how suicides and 
terminals improved the algae pudding, fertilized the 
vegetables, and made his business profitable. 

Sunde followed him as he returned the ax to its wall 
bracket two storefronts away. 

“I fail. I fail,” she cried, tears running down her 
cheeks. 

The doctor ignored her. Yesterday, she had become 
hysterical, claiming to have done something that caused 
the death of her three-year-old son. 

L’Espoir was almost to his door when he heard a 
sad, sweet alien song — music he recognized like a 
wound recognizes salt. He froze, engrossed in 
memories. 

“Pleeease,” Sunde screeched as she caught up with 
him again. She pointed at the sign in his window. The 
blood bold neon sang over and over: 

Success Unlimited 

In smaller, steady white neon the sign added: 

Have a Good Death 

“That’s what I desire. The priest forgave me. The 
Cardinal forgave me. But God does not forgive me. I 



SONGS OF THE SOUL 



53 



feel it’s so.” 

L’Espoir knew that most people didn’t have good 
deaths despite the industry of a million churches. They 
came to life’s end afflicted with ,/ onlys and might have 
beens, and guilts of a billion nagging varieties. 

“Ms. Sunde, I informed you yesterday that I have no 
time to work pro bono publico.' 1 '’ 

“No pro bono. Please do free.” 

“Pro bono is Latin for in the” — his palms turned up 
in frustrated resignation — “for free.” 

“Yes. Cleanse my mind free.” 

He was probably wasting his breath again. “If the 
Cardinal says God forgives you, believe him, woman.” 
Large liquid eyes held him captive. “You have been 
loved, Doctoree. I can tell.” 

Memory rushed in on him again. If only he hadn’t 
gone to the pub that night. If only he hadn’t been so 
eager to talk. He and his fellow academics knew how 
the galaxy should be run. Conversation was oil for the 
machinery of intellect. If only he hadn’t been thirty 
minutes late. 

“My personal affairs are none of — ” 

“I watch you. You are a man of loneliness. You 
take no companions.” Her hand reached tentatively for 
his. 

“Ms Sunde, your sexual favors will not buy my 
services. Now — ” 

“Why does a good man stay in this place where all 
evil comes?” 

“My motivations are none of — ” 

“What do you look for?” 

He shoved past her into his front office, neglecting to 
lock the door behind him. Glancing nervously about his 
small, white storefront, he ignored his many diplomas, 
black framed and dusty, favoring instead his 
electro-receptionist in its ebony desk. He had a 
legitimate medical doctorate; indeed, in a hundred and 
fifty years of striving, he had earned doctorates in 
general medicine, biochemistry, psychiatry, neurology, 
neurosurgery, neurophysics, quantum electronics, and 
xenoneurology (a very new field), and had a string of 
other framed degrees he seldom dusted, but had lovingly 
smuggled across the vastness of space to this world 
where they meant little — and the law feared to come. 

Just as the doctor punched on the 
electro-receptionist, he heard someone come in behind 
him. Suddenly there was the stench of body odor and the 
sound of labored breath. The doctor’s hand hovered over 
the panic button; his shoulder muscles squirmed with 
tension. Part of his exorbitant rent went for armament 
and muscle called the Goon Squad. Was this intruder a 
ruthless killer? The Hole was their haven. Perhaps a 
government infiltrator? He read upside down the 
information fed from his smart door into his 
electro-receptionist: “Two meters tall, one hundred and 
ninety kilograms, human male, Caucasian, no 

fingerprints, iris pattern fake. No weapons. Searching 
Jackson's files." Jackson Hole’s over-burdened 



computer was slow. Most likely the man was a minor 
scoundrel or con artist. 

Cautiously, L’Espoir turned around. His eyes met 
the tiny dark eyes of the most grossly corpulent man he 
had ever seen. The fellow’s belly arrived a half meter 
before his feet. Still, it was obvious this person had once 
been heavier. His flesh hung obscenely loose and he 
wore an empty holster and coiled clear tubing where a 
nasal-oxygen canister had once hung. Heavy-weight 
humans required extra oxygen. His once expensive 
tent-sized cashmere jacket looked like a wrinkled dirty 
blanket dropped over a hairless, flabby ape. In an age 
when beauty could be purchased, this man was grossly 
ugly, and he stunk as if he hadn’t bathed in weeks. 

The doctor had learned that criminals generally 
appear either ordinary or lethal. The tension drained 
from his shoulders as he walked around to take his seat 
behind the electro-receptionist. Maybe this customer 
was just a lost soul from a low-gravity world. The 
cheapest transport didn’t allow for baths. 

The visitor’s cherub-pink mouth pursed; several 
chins quivered with his intent to speak. “Metzger 
Eisenhart,” he said in an unexpectedly pleasant baritone 
voice that evidenced twinges of pain. According to the 
tardy receptionist, Metzger had arrived at seven hundred 
hours two days before. 

“Take a seat please,” said the doctor. The man 
pulled one of L’Espoir’s cheap plastilike chairs across 
the rug to the desk and overwhelmed it with his bulk. 
Despite the man’s tremendous weight, there was 
something snakelike about him. Perhaps the eyes? 

“Do you have a terminality certificate or proof of a 
suicide implant?” 

Terminals were sad, but suicides caused Dr. 
L’Espoir the most anguish. Even this damnable outlaw 
world wouldn’t let him help anyone with a projected life 
span over two weeks. Suicides would die even if he 
relieved them of the reasons for their depression. When 
they received their death certificates, a destruct 
mechanism was placed within their bodies. Tampering 
with the device only meant it would go off earlier. 

The man produced a certificate. Weeks before, he 
had been hit in the abdomen by a low-level shatter-gun 
blast and had, at most, a few more agonizing days. 

That explained a lot. Low-level shattering blasts 
were the punishment of choice meted out by gambling 
casinos when their clients didn’t pay: terminal, if the 
client didn’t have regeneration funds, and always 
excruciatingly painful. 

L’Espoir punched up a list of the current terminals 
and suicides. He couldn’t help but notice that Sunde’s 
name was not among them. Metzger’s papers were in 
order. 

“In case of your decease during the process, to 
whom may I send your remains? There is, of course, an 
extra fee of — ” 

The man’s huge hand moved with unexpected speed, 
catching the good doctor by the shirt front, pulling him 



54 



GALAXY 



out of his seat. “You’d better not let me die before you 
finish. You hear me.” 

L’Espoir’s finger was a half second from the panic 
alarm and his heart in his throat. 

“Sorry.” Metzger released the shirt fabric and sank 
back into his chair, wheezing. “It’s just that I want to die 
clean.” 

“Yes,” responded Dr. L’Espoir, trying to calm his 
adrenaline rush. Whoever or whatever the man was, he 
had strong beliefs about death. “My services are very 
important and — ” 

“Can you ram-ass do it? I mean I heard rutting 
rumors about this ten E-years ago. When governments 
do a mind wipe, you’re back to shitting in your pants and 
learning to walk.” 

The doctor steepled his fingers thoughtfully. “My 
procedure is much more selective than a mind wipe. 
Emotions have a greater valence in the mind than 
unemotional facts, and guilt is an especially strong 
emotion in some. Suppose you wanted to be president of 
XYZ Corporation by your three hundredth birthday but 
never made it. Now you are dying and. ” 

Metzger snorted derisively. 

“Or maybe you hurt someone you loved, said words 
that were best left unsaid, or accidentally killed innocent 
people and have spent your life miserable with guilt as a 
result.” 

“Can you really get rid of . ass-ramming guilt 
without removing the good stuff — like food 
memories?” 

“Yes. It’s a tedious process. I must follow the 
thread of your chosen guilt to its very beginnings, which 
often can go back to childhood. Guilt, being a stronger 
emotion, can frequently be teased out of a complex 
emotional gestalt. But, even with my special equipment, 
this can take days, depending on how much guilt must be 
expunged, and how far back it goes in the patient’s 
history.” 

“You won’t have to go far with me. Eleven E-years 
ago I stumbled over this . this freak singing bitch who 
was just begging for it.” 

To Dr. L’Espoir this explained a lot. Sexual sins! 
During those eleven years, Metzger could have joined a 
dozen anti-sex religious cults, which might explain his 
preoccupation with a clean death. Shame-based 
religions were once again pandemic. 

“No earlier shame you would like erased?” 

“Hell, no. I had a great life up until I saw that 
poisonous freak singer. Can’t get her out of my mind.” 
His cold obsidian eyes squirmed in their sockets. “You 
can do this, huh?” 

“I can remove all memory of sins of omission or 
commission, and unfulfilled goals.” 

“Well, well. So any little turd can die thinking he’s 
a fat success.” 

Metzger was wobbling his chins and grinning in a 
way that made the doctor’s stomach turn queasy. 

“Can you guarantee you’ll get the job done” — he 



wheezed — “before I feed the rutting recyclers?” 

“I believe I — ” 

The fat sausage-fingered hand was aiming for his 
shirt front again. 

L’Espoir fought to keep the panic from his voice. “I 
guarantee it.” 

The pale hand returned to the ebony countertop. 

“I have friends here who would avenge me, if you 
fail.” 

The doctor doubted that Metzger had friends on 
Jackson Hole, and how could they know if he failed once 
Metzger was dead? 

“You keep records of what you read in a man’s 
mind?” Metzger fidgeted and the plastilike chair 
complained. 

“I am a psychiatrist, and anything I learn about you 
is strictly confidential. It’s the law.” 

“Like there’s law here on Jackson Hole.” Metzger 
sneered, and then winced. 

“In any case, I am an ethical man. I won’t tell, and 
I’m not a member of any law enforcement agency.” 

“I bet not!” The man’s laugh was liquid, moist like 
bubbling mucus. “I heard about you on the holo. They 
want your ass roasted.” 

He tried not to let his personal feelings about 
patients affect his work. Despite everything that had 
happened and what humanity thought. Dr. L’espoir knew 
he was a good man, even a compassionate man. His 
intentions had always been the best. He tried to extend 
any benevolence he could equally to all sentient beings. 

“You are correct,” L’Espoir said in his coldest tones, 
his mind returning instantly to that lurid headline, “Son 
of First Ambassador to an Alien World Angers 
Churches.” And, to that morning in President Nullarbor’s 
office. 

Lavish with ancient Earth furnishings, it smelled of 
wood and lemon oil. Dr. Nullarbor glared at him from 
behind what seemed a hectometer of desk. 

“Did you see Walters on the net last night? ‘God is 
no longer needed. Professor L’Espoir invented a 
machine that does away with bad conscience.’” 

“Yes.” He could barely speak. Having been ignored 
for so many years as a wealthy dilettante, L’Espoir 
hadn’t expected such rabid media response to his 
research. “Blood of Christ Not Needed. Machine 
Removes All Shame!” screamed the headlines of yellow 
tabloids and church newsletters alike. 

Even the Journal of Clinical and Consulting 
Psychiatry had skewered him: “Spare the Guilt and Spoil 
the Personality.” Those authors conjectured that artificial 
removal of guilt would distort personality structure. 
Only at the very end of this article did they mention that 
his machine might be a boon to humankind. 

“My research wasn’t carried out with university 
money, or on university time.” His vocal cords were 
tense. 

The device the press called his neuroprogrammer or 
reprogrammer had been built in his own well-equipped 



SONGS OF THE SOUL 



55 



home laboratory. How academia would laugh if the truth 
were known. His reprogrammer was simply the 
accidental by-product of unsuccessful research. He had 
been hunting for the soul in the subatomic particles of 
body and brain. He hadn’t found the soul, only guilt. 

“1 never liked you, L’Espoir. You’re pompous, 
arrogant — ” He held up a warning hand. “I know you 
have tenure and I know what your money has done for 
this school. You’re fired!” 

At a time when he was lonely and grief-stricken, the 
churches had condemned him — while every 
government on every human world wanted his plans, his 
reprogrammer, his abilities. They more than wanted, 
they threatened. They hounded. How could he trust the 
morality of any government? 

He blew up his machine and fled. 

His had been a long journey from that lemon-scented 
university office to the stench of Jackson. He had served 
several years as a physician on a pirate craft, 
rationalizing that pirates were people, regardless of their 
morals. They bled. It was convenient to forget that their 
victims also bled. Besides, the pirates’ illicit contacts 
had helped him acquire the components necessary to 
build a more complex version of his machine. 

L’Espoir’s mind abruptly returned from the ruins of 
his academic life to the matter at hand, and his lips 
finished the statement he had meant to make. “Indeed, if 
an auto-da-fe were still legal, I’d probably have been 
burned at the stake.” His tone continued icy. “Describe 
your guilt.” 

“No!” Fat hands made fists. 

This was a frequent if insane response. Soon he 
would know everything about this man — except his 
soul. 

In a swift glance of reappraisal, the doctor noted a 
large pale band on Metzger’s left wrist, and several 
fingers looked as if they had once worn rings. He had 
probably sold his body chronometer and jewelry 
somewhere along the way. 

“Now, can you afford my services? I ask the 
equivalent of ten thousand United Galaxy credits.” 

Monetary exchange was difficult on Jackson Hole. 
Barter was the norm. 

L’Espoir waited anxiously as his obese patient 
reached into his right breast pocket and pulled out a soft 
cloth bag. The bag, dumped unceremoniously on the 
countertop, revealed three Melian crystals that caught the 
light with a display of scintillating rainbow color. 

Dr. L'Espoir was relieved. Usually his terminal 
patients were poor. If they had decent goods or credit, 
they had themselves put into the recreation vats and 
regenerated. These gems were sufficient for his fee, 
even if they were of the most minimal quality — but not 
enough for a regeneration however perfect their 
crystalline structure. 

An hour later. Dr. Jean L’Espoir sat in his back 
office before a console with a hundred and three keys, all 
of which were backup for a sophisticated voice- 



command system restricted to his voice alone. 

During his years on Jackson Hole, this computer had 
been recording the miseries of his patients. In it lived a 
trillion sorrows, a million defeats, and hundreds of 
millions of petty crimes all sucked from the brains of 
despairing humanity. L’Espoir took great pride in this 
accomplishment. 

Its virtual reality component allowed him to 
experience the complete sensory, mental, and emotional 
life of his patients. Using virtual reality, he could even 
visit the atomic or subatomic level of a human being, but 
he usually preferred to bring that view to the attached 
two-meter by two-meter hologram pedestal and there 
symbolically cut and splice, build and destroy. The 
actual work was done by atom-sized robots (that made 
retroviruses look like giants) and minute electrical pulses 
that rearranged neurohormones. Memory formation 
proteins could be altered or added. 

The naked Metzger was sedated, relaxed on a sliding 
gurney, hooked to catheters to remove the body’s waste 
products, to intravenous fluids to keep him from 
dehydration, and to a breather to oxygenate his blood. 
The gurney was slid into an electronic tube. 
Supersensitive microminiature electrodes covered 
Metzger’s white sluglike body connecting him with the 
doctor’s neural reprogrammer. 

A silent prayer trembled on L’Espoir’s lips as he 
asked for guidance in bringing comfort to the afflicted. 
Out loud, he commanded the machine. 

Metzger was right. The most prominent track in his 
mind concerned food. He had once frequented all the 
best restaurants on Rigala, L’Espoir’s home world. 
Indeed, Metzger had been among the Galactic 
Gourmand. Food appeared a dead end. Best to go to the 
physical pain. 

Suddenly the doctor saw the world as Metzger had 
seen it twenty E-days before — according to Metzger’s 
chronograph. Metzger Eisenhart, in a torment about 
white hair and desperate for his Angel Blue fix, was in a 
private room of an elegantly appointed restaurant waiting 
to meet his drug contact when a cyborg dressed all in 
tight black synleather came in. 

“Mr. Holovid Viper, Mr. Porno Peddler” — the one 
electronic eye made a minute whizzing noise as it spun 
into focus — “it’s time to pay the piper, or I cut off more 
than the music.” The cyborg’s tone was corrosive. 

“Look, give me another week. I’ll get the goods. I 
have a lead on a new project . .” 

Metzger was lying. Anything Metzger owned or 
could steal, he’d trade for Angel Blue. He’d been 
gambling, hoping to strike it big and feed that greedy 
hopper in his brain. 

Metzger cringed. The cyborg was slipping his 
shatter gun from its holster. 

“Suppose I give you some lovely Melian crystals, 
just between you and me. You wait until next week to 
collect — ” The cyborg’s part-human, part-electronic 



56 



GALAXY 



glance was almost cryogenic. “Look, I’ll give your boss 
ten of my very best holovids for his exclusive use. 
Never seen before. Pornography like — ” 

The cyborg reached behind Metzger, grabbed him by 
the neck of his jacket and lifted his whole lard-lazy bulk 
over the table, disturbing only one half-finished bottle of 
vintage Earth wine. 

In the maintenance way behind the restaurant, 
Metzger received the blast that gave him his soon-to-be 
terminal indigestion. 

This wasn’t the first time the doctor had felt a certain 
repugnance for his patients. Not everyone had the 
advantage of his moral training, his small-planet 
upbringing, his age and extensive education. Perhaps the 
man had actually been producing erotica. On Metzger’s 
home planet, pornography could be legal, acceptable. 
Different worlds had different ethical structures. The 
good doctor was proud of his liberality, and reminded 
himself not to make value judgments. 

Metzger’s drug habit certainly wasn’t new and 
probably not legal. People turn to drugs for a reason and 
that reason might reveal the source of the guilt that 
plagued him. L’espoir took a deep breath before 
plunging on. His lips commanded and thousands of 
thin-sliced views of Metzger’s brain appeared and 
rotated in space, turning in an instant into maps of what 
seemed unending pathways, all interconnected in all 
known dimensions. Some pathways were more worn 
than others. 

Like bloodhounds, the doctor and his computer 
sniffed out feelings about white hair and drug memories, 
backing up across the years to the first time this patient 
had dermal-patched Angel Blue. 

Metzger was unable to sleep. This had never 
happened to him before. He woke up in a sweat, 
cringing with intense guilt, remembering silky white hair 
and large violet eyes. This was impossible. He couldn’t 
be feeling guilt. Why was this one rutting half-breed 
broad any different? White silky hair; violet eyes. Such 
emotion. Such pathos. Metzger was crying. He had 
never before cried as an adult. 

Soon he was asleep again and remembering, reliving 
in minute detail that evening at the club, that whole 
hideous night. 

The contents of Metzger’s mind startled the doctor. 
He recognized The Dream Machine Club on Rigala and 
the white-haired half-human, half-Cetian empathic 
emoter singing on its stage. Her hauntingly lovely voice 
sang of relationships and life. 

Here is where Metzger’s guilt was born, the first in 
his long hedonistic life. Screaming in psychic misery, 
Metzger awakened to call a derm peddler for special 
delivery. 

With sudden morbid comprehension. Dr. L’Espoir 
escaped the virtual reality of Metzger’s viewpoint, 
turning instead to the remoteness of holo display. His 



left temporal artery bulged. 

He found himself the prisoner of emotions he had 
never allowed himself to experience before — all of an 
intensity that astonished him. His own guilt was aroused 
and memory made it a monster that sat on his chest and 
robbed him of breath. Guilt then hauled him by the heels 
down long stairs, his head bumping on each step, on each 
hard truth. His heart pounded, his mind plummeted 
down and down into the pit. Abilities unsuspected and 
capacities untried came to his consciousness. 

The holo display now showed Metzger’s sweaty 
hands groping for a patch of Angel Blue. 

Trembling all over. Dr. L’Espoir quit his connection 
with Metzger’s mind, rapidly gathered up all that passed 
for his portable wealth on Jackson, including the Melian 
crystals, and made arrangements for the unconscious 
Metzger’s transference to a regeneration tank, as his 
uncle, his unlucky uncle. His gut would be healed. 
L’Espoir would pay the man’s regeneration bill. 

Back at work again, L’Espoir’s fingers played and 
the represented neurons of his patient’s brain danced. 
Sweat poured from L’Espoir’s forehead. The computer 
image of Metzger’s memories began to change. 
Twenty-four weary hours later, L’Espoir stumbled into 
his front office and was leaning over to pull a pint bottle 
from the bottom drawer of the electro-receptionist when 
he saw Sunde, her nose pressed to the plastiglass of his 
window, like a child staring into a candy store. She 
backed up and smiled shyly. Her smile vanished, 
however, when she saw L’Espoir tip the pint bottle to his 
mouth. 

Every day for a week, Sunde ’s elfin features 
appeared outside his window. And every day for a week, 
L’Espoir drank. During this time he even turned away 
paying customers to continue his work on the computer 
representation of Metzger’s memories. 

One morning, he did interview a customer. “Do you 
have a certificate of terminality or suicide?” he asked as 
he gazed toward his window. Sunde had grown 
progressively thinner; there were now purple pouches 
under her eyes. 

The man presented his certificate as L’Espoir 
punched up the current list of the dying and suicidal. 
This customer was a terminal with the occupation of 
security executive, the local euphemism for paid 
assassin. At the end of the suicide list L’Espoir saw: 
Sunde, musil finder. 

He took an almost hysterical gulp of air as rage 
surged through him. He ran around the 

electro-receptionist and out his front door. How could 
she do this? How could she afford a suicide implant? No 
one would pay a musHfinder that much. He knew the 
answer to his question. Prostitution. 

“Why?” he screamed. 

Sunde cowered as if he might hit her. “Not strong,” 
she said. “Pain.” Sunde walked off, slump-shouldered, 
her paper garment nearly falling from her slim body. 

A week later, Metzger Eisenhart was returned to the 



SONGS OF THE SOUL 



57 



doctor, still unconscious, regenerated, slim, and good for 
at least another E-century. 

L’Espoir smiled indulgently upon the man who was 
still unconscious, once again strapped onto his gurney, 
and soon to be clutched by his electronic ring, poked by 
catheters, and covered with electrodes. His excess of 
white flabby flesh was now replaced by well-toned 
muscle. For a split second, the doctor envied Metzger 
his new-made body that smelled so pure, so clean. 

For three more days, L’Espoir hammered away, 
sleeplessly reprogramming the old mind in that new 
body. Tormented as he was, he could never have slept. 
He drank steadily. 

He finally brought Eisenhart to consciousness, but 
did not yet give him access to his long-term memory, 
and kept him restrained bodily — except for eye 
movement — both by chemicals and belts. Metzger’s 
dark eyes flickered awake. 

“I’ve waited a long time for you, Metzger. I found 
your little problem and cured it. A deficiency in 
affection, an inability to feel for others, to put yourself in 
their place.” 

Metzger’s eyes glanced a piercing question and 
probably a curse. 

“In previous unenlightened times, you might have 
been called a sociopath. Like other sociopaths you were 
very successful at making money, at least until you met 
that half-human, half-Cetian empathic emoter singing in 
The Dream Machine. The press had fun with her: 
‘Half-Cetian Sings the Blues for Professor Hubby.’ 

“Cetian songs are always about” — his voice failed 
— “ethical problems, and she was loved by many in our 
university town. Because of her parentage, she had a 
special ability to make others feel. You kidnapped her, 
raped her, and tortured her for your holovid cameras — 
to feast the sickness of some minds. She was forced to 
perform vile sexual acts. Partially flayed alive and kept 
living by drugs and machines, she was made to. .” His 
mind balked; his lips refused to name the agony. “She 
performed one act you never expected. She made even 
you feel for her. Pity this didn’t keep you from 
murdering others.” 

Metzger’s eyes seemed huge now, and mad. 

“Oh, yes, I traveled through your mind, as best I 
could — like wading through infested sewage. I dis- 
covered something horrific, more terrible than I would 
ever have believed possible fifteen E-years or even 
fifteen E-days ago. I discovered the full depth of my 
own guilt. You see, she had the same effect on me, and 
I’ll never be able to forget her. Because of you, I have 
discovered that my much vaunted compassion is a 
sham.” 

L’Espoir moved a wheelchair up next to Metzger 
and began deftly removing catheters and electrodes. He 
undid the belts and gave his patient yet another injection. 

Dr. L’Espoir leaned over Metzger, deliberately 
breathing alcohol fumes into his face. “At your whim 
thousands died horrible deaths. You, who brought death 



without compassion, will now receive life from someone 
whose compassion is a fraud.” 

Metzger’s eyes rolled wildly like those of a trapped 
animal. 

“You see, our meeting was destiny. That 
half-human, half-Cetian woman was my wife of three 
E-years. She was still young, only an E-century, and 
writing her dissertation on neurophysics and working 
weekend evenings singing at The Dream Machine.” 
L’Espoir’s voice was strained through tightly clenched 
teeth. “I was supposed to pick her up after her last set, 
but I was solving the problems of the universe and forgot 
the hour — thus giving you and your henchmen the 
opportunity to kidnap her. 

“Not until I visited your mind did I know what had 
happened to her. The authorities implied that she had 
left me because of all my adverse publicity. I even 
suspected that some government had taken her to trade 
for my cooperation. But, over the years, no evidence 
evolved to support this theory.” 

Saliva oozed from Metzger’s lips. 

“Admittedly, I hadn’t been a very attentive husband. 
She was truly innocent, loving, sweet, and — however 
inadvertently — my garrulous nature caused her 
agonizing death. My last words to her were unkind. 
Remorse and loneliness nearly destroyed me.” 

Metzger groaned. 

The doctor’s voice dropped to a guttural whisper. 
“You who were talented at assigning all failures and 
shortcomings to others, you who had never felt a 
moment of guilt or remorse or a twinge of shame before 
finding Aelia, will now remember nothing but failure, 
shame, guilt, and remorse.” 

Metzger’s eyes were aflame with anger and his body 
twitched violently as the doctor hauled him up and 
shoved him into a wheelchair. He gave the man one last 
injection, then punched his alarm button just before he 
punched his door open. Once out the door, the doctor 
dumped Metzger’s limp body into the street, then threw 
his now too large clothes on top of him. 

L’Espoir looked around for Ms. Sunde but didn’t see 
her. Most of the population was attending the knife 
duels. Fake Earth stars shown overhead while shadows 
crowded each other in the street. 

“I expunged what joy I could search out in your 
mind. You’ll find no pleasure now, or ever again, in 
others’ pain. You’ll never recall the taste of your 
favorite foods, the softness of a caress, and I did a core 
dump of the misery files of my reprogrammer right into 
your filthy fat skull.” 

Had he seen someone move in the shadows? Had the 
Goons arrived? 

“You’ll feel immensely guilty for late arrivals, for 
forgetting natal days, for flunking tests, for any 
indecency.” 

Slumped against the wall, Metzger began fighting to 
regain more use of his body. He made an ancient and 
lewd hand gesture with a middle finger. “I’ll . I’ll buy 



58 



GALAXY 



a suicide . He choked. A look of horror came to his 
face. 

“Suicide is a sin; and besides, they won’t sell you a 
suicide machine.” L’Espoir seemed to admire his 
manicure as he recalled his visit with Jackson’s 
Administrator. 

He was escorted past a dozen men and women 
cooling their heels outside the door. 

In that white box of an office, there was no seat for a 
guest; but there was a caged tracking-laser. Roasting a 
guest was acceptable; burning a hole in the bulkhead was 
not. 

“My Uncle Metzger Eisenhart may desire to buy a 
suicide or to provoke his own death at the hands of your 
men,” L’Espoir said to the nondescript little man behind 
the large desk, a man who went by no other name than 
Administrator. 

“Metzger Eisenhart.” The Administrator tapped a 
few keys on his desk and a picture of the obese Eisenhart 
appeared on the desktop. “He was terminal,” said the 
Administrator as he glanced up with questioning eyes. 
“You bought him a regeneration.” 

“I emphatically request that he not come to harm in 
any way.” 

“Emphatically request . !” 

L’Espoir’s temerity led to a heated discussion and 
the demand for a huge bribe. The doctor found himself 
saying, “I bring millions” — each word enunciated like a 
precise little bite — “in goods to this world.” 

“You bring fertilizer!” the man spat, his face like 
stone, his words like acid. 

“The same thing! If you could find a corrupt scientist 
intelligent enough to understand my machine, I would 
have been dead long ago.” L’Espoir closed the gap 
between himself and the desk. The warning light on the 
laser pulsed. “I’m not afraid of eviction.” He suddenly 
knew he wanted this revenge more than life itself. “I’m 
willing to leave, dead or alive. But 1 will take my 
machine with me ... in a blaze of glory, so to speak.” He 
hadn’t wired this machine to self-destruct, but the 
Administrator didn’t know that. 

A few minutes later, L’Espoir came to an 
understanding with the Administrator. 

“You will buy no death on this world,” L’Espoir said 
as his thoughts came back to the man squirming at his 
feet. “And now your health is extraordinarily good. 
Atomic-sized assemblers of my own invention wait in 
your blood to correct any ill, any injury.” He had 
invented no such assemblers. “No poison or 
mind-altering drug will help. You’ll have to find some 
new way to assuage your misery.” In an especially coy 
and affected tone he added, “1 suggest sucking vacuum. 
Or, perhaps you’d like your mind wiped and your bottom 
wiped when you shit in your pants. 

“You’ll experience keen misery for not making 
technocrat of the year. A billion mind-meddling demons 
will afflict you.” 

“You” — Metzger snarled — “you father-rutting 



asspipe cockroach.” 

L’Espoir lounged against his storefront, arms folded 
over his chest. “You seem to have plumbed your earliest 
memories — obscenities you learned, no doubt, at your 
mother’s knee.” 

“You crap- faced, freako mad scientist, who 
appointed you God?” 

“That comment minus the obscenities is more or less 
what my beautiful wife said to me the evening of the 
night you abducted her.” He unfolded his arms and 
began to pace restlessly around his victim. 

“I’ll kill — ” Metzger moaned. His angry eyes 
suddenly went sad. “K-krist on a — ” 

“I did wonderfully detailed work on you, work I 
didn’t believe possible. Guilt I knew I could destroy, but 
I had never before tried other more delicate emotions. 
Too bad I didn’t think to reprogram your vocabulary.” 

“I’ll kill. .” Metzger began to cry, great sobs soon 
racking his slim body. 

Dr. L’Espoir laughed. The neon scarlet of his sign 
played over Metzger’s newly revised body. “Success 
Unlimited, Success Unlimited,” the sign flashed 
repetitively. A visceral sense of ultimate despair gripped 
L’Espoir. He knew there was no success for him. 
Whatever a soul might be, his was corrupted forever. 

The fire ax that hung on a wall two storefronts down 
caught his eye. He grabbed it up and returned to hover 
menacingly over Metzger, enjoying the man’s abject 
terror. Insane laughter rippled in his throat. “Maybe we 
should test my new assemblers by chopping off a leg.” 

Ms. Sunde crept from the shadows and laid a gentle 
hand on L’Espoir’s tense right forearm. “No, Doctoree, 
do not do this thing.” 

In his fervid concentration, L’Espoir shook her off, 
as if Sunde were a fly. “Should my programming prove 
unsuccessful, there’s always the Goon Squad. For now, 
they are under orders not to kill you, just to escort you 
out. Hope you live a long, long time. Hope you have 
many nightmares, Metzger. 

“Aelia’s silky white hair and violet eyes will haunt 
you as long as you live and be there in your brain when 
you finally manage to die.” 

L’Espoir’s palm slapped his door open; he ran for 
the back room. Sunde sped in after him and put her tiny 
self between him and his reprogrammer. 

“What, Doc-tor-ee, are you do-ing?” Her voice 
shook. 

Self-loathing assailed him. How could he have 
possibly thought he was more moral, more . ? He 
raised the ax over her head, over his machine. “I created 
an absolute power and I am not strong enough to use it. I 
must destroy my machine before it destroys all 
morality.” L’Espoir took another threatening step toward 
his machine, toward Sunde. 

“Help me,” Sunde pleaded. 

L’Espoir swung the ax furiously back over his 
shoulder. 

“Your machine? No! No! Please no,” she cried. She 



SONGS OF THE SOUL 



59 



ripped off her paper jumper and climbed nude onto his 
gurney. “Help me feel forgiveness.” 

L’Espoir’s voice was harsh. “You would allow a 
liar, a torturer, a brutal, amoral man to operate upon the 
atoms of your mind?” 

She nodded through her tears. 

He let the ax clatter to the floor. Noise outside. The 
Goons had arrived, late as usual. 

“How can you possibly trust me?” 

“I trust.” Her voice was small. 

“I don’t.” He turned his face away from her. 



“You . your machine ... are the hands of God.” 
“What a savage god to have such vicious hands.” 
L’Espoir turned back; tears streamed down his face. 

“God just to those who deserve. Mercy to those who 
deserve.” 

L’Espoir stroked her light blue hair as he glued 
electrodes to her scalp. Such soft, silky hair. 

“Yes, mercy to those who deserve.” 

—JACQUELINE F. FALKENHAN 




Heather Valencia 



This is the story of Anselmo Valencia, 
the spiritual leader of the Yaqui 
nation, and it is the tale of how the 
ancient sisterhood of the Yaqui 
dreaming women called me through 
time in dreams, for an appointment 
with destiny that shaped my life in its 
calling, and drew me to the heart of 
Grandmother's Great dream. It is my 
own story. 

Hardcover $19.95 Paperback $12.95, 

Dream elixir $36.50 

Dream pillow $33.33 

Dreamstone $100.00 

Call for ordering information 

1-600-669-0656 



a Yaqui dreaming woman . 




FILK 



MUSIC 




FREE CATALOG 

(310) 329-6772 
FAX 538-9208 



3754 W 1 70th St., Torrance, CA 90504-1204 




W ko knows wkat tke 
Book of Dreams says? 

I slept on tke Book of 
Dreams, kut it was 
very uncomfortakle. 



Now I use a Dream Pillow, 
and I write in tke Book of Dreams. 
Dream Pillows are an old time way of getting 
closer to tke dream world, & exploring it. 
Tkese keautiful pillows are kand-made, 
using recipes given ky Heatker Valencia, 
Yacjui Indian Dreaming Mistress. 

Send $29. Include $4 skipping. 

Money kack guarantee, of course. 



THE APOTHECARY 

2153 West Division Street 
Ckicago Illinois 60622 
(312) 772-7112 




60 



GALAXY 




LULUNGOMEENA 

By GORDON R. DICKSON 

Illustrated by Hart 

lame Clay Harbank, if you will, for what happened 
at Station 563 of the Sirius Sector; or blame 
William Peterborough, whom we called the Kid. I 
blame no one. But I am a Dorsai man. 

The trouble began the day the Kid joined the station, 
with his quick hands and his gambler’s mind, and found 
that Clay, alone of all the men there, would not gamble 
with him — for all that he claimed to having been a 
gambling man himself. And so it ran on for our years of 
service together. 

But the beginning of the end was the day they came 
off shift together. 

They had been out on a duty circuit of the frontier 
station that housed the twenty of us — searching the 
outer bubble for signs of blows or leaks. It’s a slow two 
hour tramp, that duty, even outside the station on the 
surface of the asteroid where there’s no gravity to speak 
of. We, in the recreation room, off duty, could tell by the 
sound of their voices as the inner port sucked open and 
the clanging clash of them removing their spacesuits 
came echoing to us along the metal corridor, that the Kid 
had been needling Clay through the whole tour. 

“Another day,” came the Kid’s voice, “another fifty 
credits. And how’s the piggy bank coming along, Clay?” 

There was a slight pause, and I could see Clay 
carefully controlling his features and his voice. Then his 



pleasant baritone, softened by the burr of his Tarsusian 
accent, came smoothly to us. 

“Like a gentleman. Kid,” he answered. “He never 
overeats and so he runs no danger of indigestion.” 

It was a neat answer, based on the fact that the Kid’s 
own service account was swollen with his winnings from 
the rest of the crew. But the Kid was too thick-skinned 
for rapier thrusts. He laughed; and they finished 
removing their equipment and came on into the 
recreation room. 

They made a striking picture as they entered, for 
they were enough alike to be brothers — although father 
and son would have been a more likely relationship, 
considering the difference in their ages. Both were tall, 
dark, wide-shouldered men with lean faces, but 
experience had weathered the softer lines from Clay’s 
face and drawn thin parentheses about the corners of his 
mouth. There were other differences, too; but you could 
see in the Kid the youth that Clay had been, and in Clay 
the man that the Kid would some day be. 

“Hi, Clay,” I said. 

“Hello, Mort,” he said, sitting down beside me. 

“Hi, Mort,” said the Kid. 

I ignored him; and for a moment he tensed. I could 
see the anger flame up in the ebony depths of his black 
pupils under the heavy eyebrows. He was a big man; but 
I come from the Dorsai Planets and a Dorsai man fights 
to the death, if he fights at all. And, in consequence, 
among ourselves, we of Dorsai are a polite people. 

But politeness was wasted on the Kid — as was 
Clay’s delicate irony. With men like the Kid, you have to 
use a club. 

We were in bad shape. The twenty of us at Frontier 
Station 563, on the periphery of the human area just 




LULUNGOMEENA 



61 



beyond Sirius, had gone sour, and half the men had 
applications in for transfer. The trouble between Clay 
and the Kid was splitting the station wide open. 

We were all in the Frontier Service for money; that 
was the root of the trouble. Fifty credits a day is good 
pay — but you have to sign up for a ten year hitch. You 
can buy yourself out — but that costs a hundred 
thousand. Figure it out for yourself. Nearly six years if 
you saved every penny you got. So most go in with the 
idea of staying the full decade. 

That was Clay’s idea. He had gambled most of his 
life away. He had won and lost several fortunes. Now he 
was getting old and tired and he wanted to go back — 
Lulungomeena, on the little planet of Tarsus, which was 
the place he had come from as a young man. 

But he was through with gambling. He said money 
made that way never stuck, but ran away again like 
quicksilver. So he drew his pay and banked it. 

But the Kid was out for a killing. Four years of play 
with the rest of the crew had given him more than 
enough to buy his way out and leave him a nice stake. 
And perhaps he would have done just that, if it hadn’t 
been that the Service account of Clay’s drew him like an 
El Dorado. He could not go off and leave it. So he stayed 
with the outfit, riding the older man unmercifully. 

He harped continually on two themes. He pretended 
to disbelieve that Clay had ever been a gambler; and he 
derided Lulungomeena, Clay’s birthplace: the older 
man’s goal and dream, and the one thing he could be 
drawn into talk about. For, to Clay, Lulungomeena was 
beautiful, the most wonderful spot in the Universe; and 
with an old man’s sick longing for home, he could not 
help saying so. 

“Mort,” said the Kid, ignoring the rebuff and sitting 
down beside us, “what’s a Hixabrod like?” 

My club had not worked so well, after all. Perhaps, I, 
too, was slipping. Next to Clay, I was the oldest man on 
the crew, which was why we were close friends. I 
scowled at the Kid. 

“Why?” I asked. 

“We’re having one for a visitor,” he said. 

Immediately, all talk around the recreation room 
ceased and all attention was focused on the Kid. All 
aliens had to clear through a station like ours when they 
crossed the frontier from one of the other great galactic 
power groups into human territory. But isolated as 
Station 563 was, it was seldom an alien came our way, 
and when one did, it was an occasion. 

Even Clay succumbed to the general interest. “I 
didn’t know that,” he said. “How’d you find out?” 

“The notice came in over the receiver when you 
were down checking the atmosphere plant,” answered 
the Kid with a careless wave of his hand. “I’d already 
filed it when you came up. What’ll he be like, Mort?” 

I had knocked around more than any of them — even 
Clay. This was my second stretch in the Service. I 
remembered back about twenty years, to the Denebian 



Trouble. 

“Stiff as a poker,” I said. “Proud as Lucifer, honest 
as sunlight and tight as a camel on his way through the 
eye of a needle. Sort of a humanoid, but with a face like 
a collie dog. You know the Hixabrodian reputation, don’t 
you?” 

Somebody at the back of the crowd said no, although 
they may have been doing it just to humor me. Like Clay 
with his Lulungomeena, old age was making me 
garrulous. 

“They’re the first and only mercenary ambassadors 
In the known Universe,” I said. “A Hixabrod can be 
hired, but he can’t be influenced, bribed or forced to 
come up with anything but the cold truth — and, brother, 
it’s cold the way a Hixabrod serves it up to you. That’s 
why they’re so much in demand. If any kind of political 
dispute comes up, from planetary to inter-alien power 
group levels, both sides have to hire a Hixabrod to 
represent them in the discussions. That way they know 
the other side is being honest with them. The opposing 
Hixabrod is a living guarantee of that.” 

“He sounds good,” said the Kid. “What say we get 
together and throw him a good dinner during his 
twenty-four hour stop-over?” 

“You won’t get much in the way of thanks from 
him,” I grunted. “They aren’t built that way.” 

“Let’s do it anyway,” said the Kid. “Be a little 
excitement for a change.” 

A murmur of approval ran through the room. I was 
outvoted. Even Clay liked the idea. 

“Hixabrods eat what we eat, don’t they?’ asked the 
Kid, making plans. “Okay, then, soups, salad, meats, 
champagne and brandy — ” he ran on, ticking the items 
off on his fingers. For a moment, his enthusiasm had us 
all with him. But then, just at the end, he couldn’t resist 
getting in one more dig at Clay. 

“Oh, yes,” he finished, “and for entertainment, you 
can tell him about Lulungomeena, Clay.” 

Clay winced — not obviously, but we all saw a 
shadow cross his face. Lulungomeena on Tarsus, his 
birthplace, held the same sort of obsession for him that 
his Service account held for the Kid; but he could not 
help being aware that he was prone to let his tongue run 
away on the subject of its beauty. For it was where he 
belonged, in the stomach-twisting, throat-aching way 
that sometimes only talk can relieve. 

I was a Dorsai man and older than the rest. I 
understood. No one should make fun of the bond tying a 
man to his home world. It is as real as it is intangible. 
And to joke about it is cruel. 

But the Kid was too young to know that yet. He was 
fresh from Earth — Earth, where none of the rest of us 
had been, yet which, hundreds of years before, had been 
the origin of us all. He was eager and strong and 
contemptuous of emotion. He saw, as the rest of us 
recognized also, that Clay’s tendency to let his talk 
wander ever to the wonder of Lulungomeena was the 



62 



GALAXY 



first slight crack in what had once been a man of 
unflawed steel. It was the first creeping decay of age. 

But, unlike the rest of us, who hid our boredom out 
of sympathy, the Kid saw here a chance to break Clay 
and his resolution to do no more gambling. So he struck 
out constantly at this one spot so deeply vital that Clay’s 
self-possession was no defense. 

Now, at this last blow, the little fires of anger 
gathered in the older man’s eyes. 

“That’s enough,” he said harshly. “Leave 
Lulungomeena out of the discussion.” 

“I’m willing to,” said the Kid. “But somehow you 
keep reminding me of it. That and the story that you 
once were a gambler. If you won’t prove the last one, 
how can you expect me to believe all you say about the 
first?” 

The veins stood out on Clay’s forehead; but he 
controlled himself. 

“I’ve told you a thousand times,” he said between his 
teeth. “Money made by gambling doesn’t stick. You’ll 
find that out for yourself one of these days.” 

“Words,” said the Kid airily. “Only words.” 

For a second, Clay stood staring whitely at him, not 
even breathing. I don’t know if the Kid realized his 
danger or cared, but I didn’t breathe, either, until Clay’s 
chest expanded and he turned abruptly and walked out of 
the recreation room. We heard his bootsteps die away 
down the corridor toward his room in the dormitory 
section. 

Later, I braced the Kid about it. It was his second 
shift time, when most of the men in the recreation room 
had to go on duty. I ran the Kid to the ground in the 
galley where he was fixing himself a sandwich. He 
looked up, a little startled, more than a little on the 
defensive, as I came in. 

“Oh, hi, Mort,” he said with a pretty good imitation 
of casualness. “What’s up?” 

“You,” I told him. “Are you looking for a fight with 

Clay?” 

“No,” he drawled with his mouth full. “I wouldn’t 
exactly say that.” 

“Well, that’s what you’re liable to get.” 

“Look, Mort,” he said, and then paused until he had 
swallowed. “Don’t you think Clay’s old enough to look 

after himself?” 

I felt a slight and not unpleasant shiver run down 
between my shoulder-blades and my eyes began to grow 
hot. It was my Dorsai blood again. It must have showed 
on my face, for the Kid, who had been sitting negligently 
on one edge of the galley table, got up in a hurry. 

“Hold on, Mort,” he said. “Nothing personal.” 

I fought the old feeling down and said as calmly as I 
could, “I just dropped by to tell you something. Clay has 
been around a lot longer than you have. I’d advise you to 
lay off him.” 

“Afraid he’ll get hurt?” 

“No,” I answered. “I’m afraid you will.” 



The Kid snorted with sudden laughter, half choking 
on his sandwich. “Now I get it. You think I’m too young 
to take care of myself.” 

“Something like that, but not the way you think. I 
want to tell you something about yourself and you don’t 
have to say whether I’m right or wrong — you’ll let me 
know without words.” 

“Hold it,” he said, turning red. “I didn’t come out 
here to get psyched.” 

“You’ll get it just the same. And it’s not for you only 
— it’s for all of us, because men thrown together as 
closely as we are choose up sides whenever there’s 
conflict, and that’s as dangerous for the rest of us as it is 
for you.” 

“Then the rest of you can stay out of it.” 

“We can’t,” I said. “What affects one of us affects us 
all. Now I’ll tell you what you’re doing. You came out 
here expecting to find glamour and excitement. You 
found monotony and boredom instead, not realizing that 
that’s what space is like almost all the time.” 

He picked up his coffee container. “And now you’ll 
say I’m trying to create my own excitement at Clay’s 
expense. Isn’t that the standard line?” 

“I wouldn’t know; I’m not going to use it, because 
that’s not how I see what you’re doing. Clay is adult 
enough to stand the monotony and boredom if they’ll get 
him what he wants. He’s also learned how to live with 
others and with himself. He doesn’t have to prove 
himself by beating down somebody either half or twice 
his age.” 

He took a drink and set the container down on the 
table. “And I do?” 

“All youngsters do. It’s their way of experimenting 
with their potentialities and relationships with other 
people. When they find that out, they can give it up — 
they’re mature then — although some never do. I think 
you will, eventually. The sooner you stop doing it here, 
though, the better it’ll be for you and us.” 

“And if I don’t?” he challenged. 

“This isn’t college back on Earth or some other nice, 
safe home planet, where hazing can be a nuisance, but 
where it’s possible to escape it by going somewhere else. 
There isn’t any ‘somewhere else’ here. Unless the one 
doing the hazing sees how reckless and dangerous it is, 
the one getting hazed takes it as long as he can — and 
then something happens.” 

“So it’s Clay you’re really worried about, after all.” 

“Look, get it through your skull. Clay’s a man and 
he’s been through worse than this before. You haven’t. If 
anybody’s going to get hurt, it’ll be you.” 

He laughed and headed for the corridor door. He was 
still laughing as it slammed behind him. I let him go. 
There’s no use pushing a bluff after it’s failed to work. 

The next day, the Hixabrod came. His name was Dor 
Lassos. He was typical of his race, taller than the tallest 
of his race, taller than the tallest of us by half a head, 



LULUNGOMEENA 



63 



with a light green skin and that impassive Hixabrodian 
canine face. 

I missed his actual arrival, being up in the 
observation tower checking meteor paths. The station 
itself was well protected, but some of the ships coming 
in from time to time could have gotten in trouble with a 
few of the larger ones that slipped by us at intervals in 
that particular sector. When I did get free, Dor Lassos 
had already been assigned to his quarters and the time of 
official welcoming was over. 

I went down to see him anyhow on the off-chance 
that we had mutual acquaintances either among his race 
or mine. Both of our peoples are few enough in number, 
God knows, so the possibility wasn’t too far-fetched. 
And, like Clay, I yearned for anything connected with 
my home. 

“Wer velt d’hatchen, Hixabrod — ” I began, walking 
into his apartment — and stopped short. 

The Kid was there. He looked at me with an odd 
expression on his face. 

“Do you speak Hixabrodian?” he asked 
incredulously. 

I nodded. I had learned it on extended duty during 
the Denebian Trouble. Then I remembered my manners 
and turned back to the Hixabrod; but he was already 
started on his answer. 

“En gles Ter, I tu, Dorsaiven,” returned the collie 
face, expressionlessly. “Da Tr’amgen lang. Met zurres 
nebent? ” 

"Em getluc. Me mi Dorsal fene. Nono ne — ves luc 
Les Lassos ?” 

He shook his head. 

Well, it had been a shot in the dark anyway. There 
was only the faintest chance that he had known our old 
interpreter at the time of the Denebian Trouble. The 
Hixabrods have no family system of nomenclature. They 
take their names from the names of older Hixabrods they 
admire or like. I bowed politely to him and left. 

It was not until later that it occurred to me to wonder 
what in the Universe the Kid could find to talk about 
with a Hixabrod. 

I actually was worried about Clay. Since my bluff 
with the Kid had failed, I thought I might perhaps try 
with Clay himself. At first I waited for an opportune 
moment to turn up; but following the last argument with 
the Kid, he’d been sticking to his quarters. I finally 
scrapped the casual approach and went to see him. 

I found him in his quarters, reading. It was a little 
shocking to find that tall, still athletic figure in a dressing 
gown like an old man, eyes shaded by the lean fingers of 
one long hand, poring over the little glow of a scanner 
with the lines unreeling before his eyes. But he looked 
up as I came in, and the smile on his face was the smile I 
had grown familiar with over four years of close living 
together. 

“What’s that?” I asked, nodding at the book scanner. 

He set it down and the little light went out, the lines 



stopped unreeling. 

“A bad novel,” he said, smiling, “by a poor author. 
But they’re both Tarsusian.” 

I took the chair he had indicated. “Mind if I speak 
straight out, Clay?” 

“Go ahead,” he invited. 

“The Kid,” I said bluntly. “And you. The two of you 
can’t go on this way.” 

“Well, old fire-eater,” answered Clay lightly, 
“what’ve you got to suggest?” 

“Two things. And I want you to think both of them 
bver carefully before answering. First, we see if we can’t 
get up a nine-tenths majority here in the station and 
petition him out as incompatible.” 

Clay slowly shook his head. “We can’t do that, 
Mort.” 

“I think I can get the signatures if I ask it,” I said. 
“Everybody’s pretty tired of him .... They’d come 
across.” 

“It’s not that and you know it,” said Clay. “Transfer 
by petition isn’t supposed to be prejudicial, but you and I 
know it is. He’d be switched to some hardcase station, 
get in worse trouble there, and end up in a penal post 
generally shot to hell. He’d know who to blame for it, 
and he’d hate us for the rest of his life.” 

“What of it? Let him hate us.” 

“I’m a Tarsusian. It’d bother me and I couldn’t do 
it.” 

“All right,” I said. “Dropping that, then, you’ve got 
nearly seven years in, total, and half the funds you need 
to buy out. I’ve got nearly enough saved, in spite of 
myself, to make up the rest. In addition, for your 
retirement, I’ll sign over to you my pay for the three 
years I’ve got left. Take that and get out of the Service. It 
isn’t what you figured on having, but half a loaf . ” 
“And how about your home-going?” he asked. 

“Look at me.” 

He looked; and I knew what he was seeing — the 
broken nose, the scars, the lined face — the Dorsai face. 
“I’ll never go home,” I said. 

He sat looking at me for a long moment more, and I 
fancied I saw a little light bum deep in back of his eyes. 
But then the light went out and I knew that I’d lost with 
him, too. 

“Maybe not,” he said quietly. “But I’m not going to 
be the one that keeps you from it.” 

I left him to his book. 

Shifts are supposed to run continuously, with 
someone on duty all the time. However, for special 
occasions, like this dinner we had arranged for the 
Hixabrod, it was possible, by getting work done ahead of 
time and picking the one four hour stretch during the 
twenty-four when there were no messages or ships due 
in, to assemble everybody in the station on an off-duty 
basis. 

So we were all there that evening, in the recreation 



64 



GALAXY 



room, which had been cleared and set up with a long 
table for the dinner. We finished our cocktails, sat down 
at the table and the meal began. 

As it will, the talk during the various courses turned 
to things outside the narrow limits of our present lives. 
Remembrances of places visited, memories of an earlier 
life, and the comparison of experiences, some of them 
pretty weird, were the materials of which our table talk 
was built. 

Unconsciously, all of us were trying to draw the 
Hixabrod out. But he sat in his place at the head of the 
table between Clay and myself, with the Kid a little 
farther down, preserving a frosty silence until the dessert 
had been disposed of and the subject of Media 
unexpectedly came up. 

“ — Media,” said the Kid. “I’ve heard of Media. It’s 
a little planet, but it’s supposed to have everything from 
soup to nuts on it in the way of life. There’s one little 
life- form there that’s claimed to contain something of 
value to every metabolism. It’s called — let me see now 
— it’s called — ” 

“It is called nygti ,” supplied Dor Lassos, suddenly, in 
a metallic voice. “A small quadruped with a highly 
complex nervous system and a good deal of fatty tissue. I 
visited the planet over eighty years ago, before it was 
actually opened up to general travel. The food stores 
spoiled and we had the opportunity of testing out the 
theory that it will provide sustenance for almost any kind 
of known intelligent being.” 

He stopped. 

“Well?” demanded the Kid. “Since you’re here to 
tell the story, I assume the animal kept you alive.” 

“I and the humans aboard the ship found the nygti 
quite nourishing,” said Dor Lassos. “Unfortunately, we 
had several Micrushni from Polaris also aboard.” 

“And those?” asked someone. 

“A highly developed but in-elastic life-form,” said 
Dor Lassos, sipping from his brandy glass. “They went 
into convulsions and died.” 

I had had some experience with Hixabrodian ways 
and I knew that it was not sadism, but a complete 
detachment that had prompted this little anecdote. But I 
could see a wave of distaste ripple down the room. No 
life-form is so universally well liked as the Micrushni, a 
delicate iridescent jellyfishlike race with a bent toward 
poetry and philosophy. 

The men at the table drew away almost visibly from 
Dor Lassos. But that affected him no more than if they 
had applauded loudly. Only in very limited ways are the 
Hixabrod capable of empathy where other races are 
concerned. 

“That’s too bad,” said Clay slowly. “I have always 
liked the Micrushni.” He had been drinking somewhat 
heavily and the seemingly innocuous statement came out 
like a half-challenge. 

Dor Lassos’ cold brown eyes turned and rested on 
him. Whatever he saw, whatever conclusions he came to, 



however, were hidden behind his emotionless face. 

“In general,” he said flatly, “a truthful race.” 

That was the closest a Hixabrod could come to 
praise, and I expected the matter to drop there. But the 
Kid spoke up again. 

“Not like us humans,” he said. “Eh, Dor Lassos?” 

I glared at him from behind Dor Lassos’ head. But 
he went recklessly on. 

“I said, ‘Not like us humans, eh?”’ he repeated 
loudly. The Kid had also apparently been drinking freely, 
and his voice grated on the sudden silence of the room. 

“The human race varies,” stated the Hixabrod 
emotionlessly. “You have some individuals who 
approach truth. Otherwise, the human race is not notably 
truthful.” 

It was a typical, deadly accurate Hixabrodian 
response. Dor Lassos would have answered in the same 
words if his throat was to have been cut for them the 
minute they left his mouth. Again, it should have shut 
the Kid up, and again it apparently failed. 

“Ah, yes,” said the Kid. “Some approach truth, but in 
general we are untruthful. But you see, Dor Lassos, a 
certain amount of human humor is associated with lies. 
Some of us tell lies just for fun.” 

Dor Lassos drank from his brandy glass and said 
nothing. 

“Of course,” the Kid went on, “sometimes a human 
thinks he’s being funny with his lies when he isn’t. Some 
lies are just boring, particularly when you’re forced to 
hear them over and over again. But on the other hand, 
there are some champion liars who are so good that even 
you would find their untruths humorous.” 

Clay sat upright suddenly, and the sudden start of his 
movement sent the brandy slopping out over the rim of 
his glass and onto the white tablecloth. He stared at the 
Kid. 

I looked at them all — at Clay, at the Kid and at Dor 
Lassos; and an ugly premonition began to form in my 
brain. 

“I do not believe I should,” said Dor Lassos. 

“Ah, but you should listen to a real expert,” said the 
Kid feverishly, “when he has a good subject to work on. 
Now, for example, take the matter of home worlds. What 
is your home world, Hixa, like?” 

I had heard enough and more than enough to confirm 
the suspicion forming within me. Without drawing any 
undue attention to myself, I rose and left the room. 

The alien made a dry sound in his throat and his 
voice followed me as I went swiftly down the empty 
corridor. 

“It is very beautiful,” he said in his adding machine 
tones. “Hixa has a diameter of thirty-eight thousand 
universal meters. It possesses twenty-three great 
mountain ranges and seventeen large bodies of salt water 

99 

The sound of his voice died away and I left it behind 
me. 



LULUNGOMEENA 



65 



I went directly through the empty corridors and up 
the ladder to the communications shack. I went in the 
door without pausing, without — in neglect of all duty 
rules — glancing at the automatic printer to see if any 
fresh message out of routine had arrived, without 
bothering to check the transmitter to see that it was 
keyed into the automatic location signal for approaching 
spacecraft. 

All this I ignored and went directly to the file where 
the incoming messages are kept. 

I flickered the tab and went back to the file of two 
days previous, skimming through the thick sheaf of 
transcripts under that dateline. And there, beneath the 
heading “Notices of Arrivals,” I found it, the message 
announcing the coming of Dor Lassos. I ran my finger 
down past the statistics on our guest to the line of type 
that told me where the Hixabrod’s last stop had been. 

Tarsus. 

Clay was my friend. And there is a limit to what a 
man can take without breaking. On a wall of the 
communications shack was a roster of the men at our 
station. I drew the Dorsai sign against the name of 
William Peterborough, and checked my gun out of the 
arms locker. 

I examined the magazine. It was loaded. I replaced 
the magazine, put the gun inside my jacket, and went 
back to the dinner. 

Dor Lassos was still talking. 

“ . The flora and the fauna are maintained in such 
excellent natural balance that no local surplus has 
exceeded one per cent of the normal population for any 
species in the last sixty thousand years. Life on Hixa is 
regular and predictable. The weather is controlled within 
the greatest limits of feasibility.” 

As I took my seat, the machine voice of the 
Hixabrod hesitated for just a moment, then gathered 
itself, and went on: “One day I shall return there.” 

“A pretty picture,” said the Kid. He was leaning 
forward over the table now, his eyes bright, his teeth 
bared in a smile. “A very attractive home world. But I 
regret to inform you, Dor Lassos, that I’ve been given to 
understand that it pales into insignificance when 
compared to one other spot in the Galaxy.” 

The Hixabrod are warriors, too. Dor Lassos’ features 
remained expressionless, but his voice deepened and 
rang through the room. 

“Your planet?” 

“I wish it were,” returned the Kid with the same 
wolfish smile. “I wish I could lay claim to it. But this 
place is so wonderful that I doubt if I would be allowed 
there. In fact,” the Kid went on, “I have never seen it. 
But I have been hearing about it for some years now. 
And either it is the most wonderful place in the Universe, 
or else the man who has been telling me about it — ” 

I pushed my chair back and started to rise, but Clay’s 
hand clamped on my arm and held me down. 

“You were saying — ” he said to the Kid, who had 



been interrupted by my movement. 

“ — The man who has been telling me about it,” said 
the Kid, deliberately, “is one of those champion liars I 
was telling Dor Lassos about.” 

Once more I tried to get to my feet, but Clay was 
there before me. Tall and stiff, he stood at the end of the 
table. 

“My right — ” he said out of the corner of his mouth 
to me. 

Slowly and with meaning, he picked up his brandy 
glass and threw the glass straight into the Kid’s face. It 
bounced on the table in front of him and sent brandy 
flying over the front of the Kid’s immaculate dress 
uniform. 

“Get your gun!” ordered Clay. 

Now the Kid was on his feet. In spite of the fact that 
I knew he had planned this, emotion had gotten the better 
of him at the end. His face was white with rage. He 
leaned on the edge of the table and fought with himself 
to carry it through as he had originally intended. 

“Why guns?” he said. His voice was thick with 
restraint, as he struggled to control himself. 

“You called me a liar.” 

“Will guns tell me if you are?” The Kid straightened 
up, breathing more easily; and his laugh was harsh in the 
room. “Why use guns when it’s possible to prove the 
thing one way or another with complete certainty?” His 
gaze swept the room and came back to Clay. 

“For years now you’ve been telling me all sorts of 
things,” he said. “But two things you’ve told me more 
than all the rest. One was that you used to be a gambler. 
The other was that Lulungomeena — your precious 
Lulungomeena on Tarsus — was the most wonderful 
place in the Universe. Is either one of those the truth?” 

Clay’s breath came thick and slow. 

“They’re both the truth,” he said, fighting to keep his 
voice steady. 

“Will you back that up?” 

“With my life!” 

“Ah,” said the Kid mockingly, holding up his 
forefinger, “but I’m not asking you to back those 
statements up with your life — but with that neat little 
hoard you’ve been accumulating these past years. You 
claimed you’re a gambler. Will you bet that those 
statements are true?” 

Now, for the first time. Clay seemed to see the trap. 

“Bet with me,” invited the Kid, almost lightly. “That 
will prove the first statement.” 

“And what about the second?” demanded Clay. 

“Why — ” the Kid gestured with his hand toward 
Dor Lassos — “what further judge do we need? We have 
here at our table a Hixabrod.” Half-turning to the alien, 
the Kid made him a little bow. “Let him say whether 
your second statement is true or not.” 

Once more I tried to rise from my seat and again 
Clay’s hand shoved me down. He turned to Dor Lassos. 

“Do you think you could judge such a point, sir?” he 



66 



GALAXY 



asked. 

The brown inhuman eyes met his and held for a long 
moment. 

“I have just come from Tarsus,” said the Hixabrod. 
“I was there as a member of the Galactic Survey Team, 
mapping the planet. It was my duty to certify to the truth 
of the map.” 

The choice was no choice. Clay stood staring at the 
Hixabrod as the room waited for his answer. Rage 
burning within me, I looked down the table for a sign in 
the faces of the others that this thing might be stopped. 
But where I expected to see sympathy, there was 
nothing. Instead, there was blankness, or cynicism, or 
even the wet-lipped interest of men who like their 
excitement written in blood or tears. 

And I realized with a sudden sinking of hopes that I 
stood alone, after all, as Clay’s friend. In my own 
approaching age and garrulity I had not minded his talk 
of Lulungomeena, hour on repetitive hour. But these 
others had grown weary of it. Where I saw tragedy, they 
saw only retribution coming to a lying bore. 

And what Clay saw was what I saw. His eyes went 
dark and cold. 

“How much will you bet?” he asked. 

“All I’ve got,” responded the Kid, leaning forward 
eagerly. “Enough and more than enough to match that 
bankroll of yours. The equivalent of eight years’ pay.” 

Stiffly, without a word, Clay produced his savings 
book and a voucher pad. He wrote out a voucher for the 
whole amount and laid book and voucher on the table 
before Dor Lassos. The Kid, who had obviously come 
prepared, did the same, adding a thick pile of cash from 
his gambling of recent weeks. 

“That’s all of it?” asked Clay. 

“All of it,” said the Kid. 

Clay nodded and stepped back. 

“Go ahead,” he said. 

The Kid turned toward the alien. 

“Dor Lassos,” he said. “We appreciate your 
cooperation in this matter.” 

“I am glad to hear it,” responded the Hixabrod, 
“since my cooperation will cost the winner of the bet a 
thousand credits.” 

The abrupt injection of this commercial note threw 
the Kid momentarily off stride. I, alone in the room, who 
knew the Hixabrod people, had expected it. But the rest 
had not, and it struck a sour note, which reflected back 
on the Kid. Up until now, the bet had seemed to most of 
the others like a cruel but at least honest game, 
concerning ourselves only. Suddenly it had become a 
little like hiring a paid bully to beat up a stationmate. 

But it was too late now to stop; the bet had been 
made. Nevertheless, there were murmurs from different 
parts of the room. 

The Kid hurried on, fearful of an interruption. Clay’s 
savings were on his mind. 



“You were a member of the mapping survey team?” 
he asked Dor Lassos. 

“I was,” said the Hixabrod. 

“Then you know the planet?” 

“I do.” 

“You know its geography?” insisted the Kid. 

“I do not repeat myself.” The eyes of the Hixabrod 
were chill and withdrawn, almost a little baleful, as they 
met those of the Kid. 

“What kind of a planet is it?” The Kid licked his lips. 
He was beginning to recover his usual self-assurance. “Is 
it a large planet?” 

“No.” 

“Is Tarsus a rich planet?” 

“No.” 

“Is it a pretty planet?” 

“I did not find it so.” 

“Get to the point!” snapped Clay with strained 
harshness. 

The Kid glanced at him, savoring this moment. He 
turned back to the Hixabrod. 

“Very well, Dor Lassos,” he said, “we got to the 
meat of the matter. Have you ever heard of 
Lulungomeena?” 

“Yes.” 

“Have you ever been to Lulungomeena?” 

“I have.” 

“And do you truthfully — ” for the first time, a 
fierce and burning anger flashed momentarily in the eyes 
of the Hixabrod; the insult the Kid had just unthinkingly 
given Dor Lassos was a deadly one — “ truthfully say 
that in your considered opinion Lulungomeena is the 
most wonderful place in the Universe?” 

Dor Lassos turned his gaze away from him and let it 
wander over the rest of the room. Now, at last, his 
contempt for all there was plain to be read on his face. 
“Yes, it is, ” said Dor Lassos. 

He rose to his feet at the head of the stunned group 
around the table. From the pile of cash he extracted a 
thousand credits, then passed the remainder, along with 
the two account books and the vouchers, to Clay. Then 
he took one step toward the Kid. 

He halted before him and offered his hands to the 
man — palms up, the tips of his fingers a scant couple of 
inches short of the Kid’s face. 

“My hands are clean,” he said. 

His fingers arced; and, suddenly, as we watched, 
stubby, gleaming claws shot smoothly from those 
fingertips to tremble lightly against the skin of the Kid’s 
face. 

“Do you doubt the truthfulness of a Hixabrod?” his 
robot voice asked. 

The Kid’s face was white and his cheeks hollowed in 
fear. The needle points of the claws were very close to 
his eyes. He swallowed once. 

“No — ” he whispered. 

The claws retracted. The hands returned to their 



LULUNGOMEENA 



67 



owner’s sides. Once more completely withdrawn and 
impersonal, Dor Lassos turned and bowed to us all. 

“My appreciation of your courtesy,” he said, the 
metallic tones of his voice loud in the silence. 

Then he turned and, marching like a metronome, 
disappeared through the doorway of the recreation room 
and off in the direction of his quarters. 

“And so we part,” said Clay Harbank as we shook 
hands. “I hope you find the Dorsai Planets as welcome as 
I intend to find Lulungomeena.” 

I grumbled a little. “That was plain damn 
foolishness. You didn’t have to buy me out as well.” 

“There were more than enough credits for the both of 
us,” said Clay. 

It was a month after the bet and the two of us were 
standing in the Deneb One spaceport. For miles in every 
direction, the great echoing building of this central 
terminal stretched around us. In ten minutes I was due to 
board my ship for the Dorsai Planets. Clay himself still 
had several days to wait before one of the infrequent 
ships to Tarsus would be ready to leave. 

“The bet itself was damn foolishness,” I went on, 
determined to find something to complain about. We 
Dorsai do not enjoy these moments of emotion. But a 
Dorsai is a Dorsai. I am not apologizing. 

“No foolishness,” said Clay. For a moment a shadow 
crossed his face. “You forget that a real gambler bets 
only on a sure thing. When I looked into the Hixabrod’s 
eyes, I was sure.” 



“How can you say ‘a sure thing’?” 

“The Hixabrod loved his home,” Clay said. 

I stared at him, astounded. “But you weren’t betting 
on Hixa. Of course he would prefer Hixa to any other 
place in the Universe. But you were betting on Tarsus — 
on Lulungomeena — remember?” 

The shadow was back for a moment on Clay’s face. 
“The bet was certain. I feel a little guilty about the Kid, 
but I warned him that gambling money never stuck. 
Besides, he’s young and I’m getting old. I couldn’t 
afford to lose.” 

’ “Will you come down out of the clouds,” I 
demanded, “and explain this thing? Why was the bet 
certain? What was the trick, if there was one?” 

“The trick?” repeated Clay. He smiled at me. “The 
trick was that the Hixabrod could not be otherwise than 
truthful. It was all in the name of my birthplace — 
Lulungomeena.” 

He looked at my puzzled face and put a hand on my 
shoulder. 

“You see, Mort,” he said quietly, “it was the name 
that fooled everybody. Lulungomeena stands for 
something in my language. But not for any city or town 
or village. Everybody on Tarsus has his own 
Lulungomeena. Everybody in the Universe has.” 

“How do you figure that, Clay?” 

“It’s a word,” he explained. “A word in the 
Tarsusian language. It means ‘home.’” 

—GORDON R. DICKSON 




"I've seen The Exorcist 
167 times, but it still 
didn't prepare 
me for... 

THE 

ORIGINAL 

HANDBOOK 

FOR 

THE 

RECENTLY 

DECEASED 

FIELD OPERATOR’S EDITION 
by CLAUDE NEEDHAM PhD. 

A step-by-step, day-by-day practical preparation for 
what happens to you when you are dead. Each copy 
hermetically sealed, so it's fresh for that special 
moment $12.50 paper 

Gateways Books 

1-800-869-0658 OR 916432-1716 
Use the order form on page 90 




Proofreading / Copy editing 

P.O. Box II 81 * Penn Valley. CA 95946 
f 91 6J 273-7757 



MENLO'S MIDWAY TAPE 
COMMENTARIES 

"In the currency of the carny world, worth at least twelve 
wooden nickels. Step right up to this tape." 

-Bill 

"An intoxicating ramble through more wacko spaces than a 
near-sighted spider's got spectacles... I like this tape.” 
-Douglass-T ruth 

$15.00 

Call 1-800-869-0658 

Or you can mail or fax the convenient order form on page 90. 



68 



GALAXY 





THE CLIENT FROM 
HELL 

By RICHARD CURTIS 

n the day it was reported that a spaceship had 
♦ 1 touched down in New Guinea, I was scheduled 
to have lunch with one of my oldest friends in 
the publishing business, Bob Gorenstein of Random 
House. The news had come over the radio and because of 
the remoteness of the location, the only eyewitness 
account had been phoned in by the Masefields, the 
family whose plantation had been flattened by the 600 
ton mass of the Drunians’ “travel disk.” I doubt if 
anyone on our planet within earshot of a radio or 
television talked about anything else that morning, and in 
fact by noon the first of an endless crop of alien jokes 
was already bouncing over the phone lines between 
Hollywood and New York. And so when Bob called me 
that morning to set up our lunch, he was ready with his 
quip. 

“I’m surprised to find you in,” he said. “I thought 
you’d already be on a plane to New Guinea to sign these 
guys.” 

“I hate representing celebrities,” I said. “Even 
celebrities from outer space.” 

“What do you have against celebrities?” 

“They’re impossibly demanding.” 

“That’s certainly true,” said Gorenstein. “But I can’t 
believe you’d turn down an opportunity to be the literary 
agent for the first alien visitors in the history of the 



world.” 

“I’m sure they’re as big a pain in the ass as any other 
stars, plus they probably smell bad.” 

Bob booked lunch at 1 p.m. at An American Place on 
East 32nd Street, where we continued our banter over 
drinks. Shortage of time prohibits me from detailing 
these exchanges, which are irrelevant anyway. Suffice it 
to say that publishing people are among the wittiest of 
any profession, and there was much hilarity as we 
invented scenarios for such things as alien author tours, 
publishing parties, and talk show interviews. 

As Gorenstein donned his reading glasses to review 
the menu, he flashed a provocative smile. “Buddy Alter 
is already on his way to Papua.” 

I shook my head. “Why am I not surprised to hear 
this?” Buddy Alter stood at the purple end of the 
spectrum of literary agents, a true parasite who battened 
on the very worst that human nature had to offer. The 
moment a news story broke about some lurid murder, 
sex scandal, or tragedy, Buddy booked a plane to 
persuade the principals to let him handle their book, 
movie, and allied merchandise rights. And he didn’t 
particularly care whether he represented perpetrator or 
victim. Buddy was the literary agent equivalent of an 
ambulance chaser. 

A twinkle in Gorenstein’s eyes told me there was 
something more. An instant later I guessed what it was. 
“And I suppose Random House has agreed to buy the 
book from Buddy if he comes back with their exclusive 
story.” 

Gorenstein smiled, not very cryptically. “The salmon 
special sounds very good.” 

“God almighty, Bob,” I said, pounding the table. The 
china and silver jangled and the hubbub around us died 



THE CLIENT FROM HELL 



69 



for a moment as heads turned to the source of the 
disruption. “Have you no shame?” I murmured after the 
noise level rose again. 

Gorenstein chuckled. “We’ve only bought a right of 
first refusal,” he said, summoning our waiter. 

Thus began what might be called The Great Alien 
Sweepstakes, for as it turned out Buddy Alter was but 
one of a veritable tsunami of media representatives that 
swept across the Pacific Ocean that week hoping not 
merely to witness humanity’s first confirmed encounter 
with members of a non-human race, but to tie up the 
exclusive rights to their story. The New Guinea 
government attempted to cordon off the site until it was 
established that the “alien blokes” were neither hostile 
nor contagious. But even the best armed military 
contingent is no match for a determined and resourceful 
television crew or an aggressive team of newspaper 
reporters. Certainly the army was no match for the likes 
of Buddy Alter and his vision of fabulous commissions. 
It is said he had actually brought his checkbook with 
him! In what currency? I wondered. 

I watched this circus on television and could only 
shake my head, as I had all during that lunch with Bob 
Gorenstein while I listened to him justifying his 
company’s decision to get involved in the bidding war. 

I suppose my reluctance to jump into this feeding 
frenzy will puzzle the reader, just as it did my colleagues 
in the publishing industry. It’s a sign of the times that 
nobody even tried to understand how appalling I found it 
that people would cast their dignity to the winds to cash 
in on this event. Realizing that anything I said would 
sound like sour grapes, I said very little at all, but not a 
few colleagues thought that my attitude was insufferably 
smug. 

Even my wife suggested I was foolish not to make at 
least some effort to offer the visitors representation. 
“Wouldn’t they be better off in your hands than in Buddy 
Alter’s? My God, he’ll have them endorsing Miller Lite 
Beer!” 

We had just clicked off the evening television news 
with the latest report on the carnival in New Guinea. 
Two executives from the Disney Company had offered 
to transport the space ship to a site in Texas and create a 
10,000 acre theme park around it. 

“Not you, too,” I moaned. 

My wife gazed crossly at me. “Sometimes you wave 
your dignity around like some crusader’s sword. Would 
it be so terrible for you to make an effort to contact 
them? Or have you suddenly become allergic to big 
commissions?” 

This last remark stung me. “I thought you 
understood how I feel.” 

“Why don’t you run it past me once again to make 
sure.” 

“The whole thing is . well, so undignified.” 

She peered at me. “The agent for the Butcher of 
Harlem is suddenly donning the mantle of dignity?” 

“I didn’t solicit him,” 1 replied feebly. 



She scowled. “I see. It’s dignified to represent a man 
who slaughtered and cannibalized fifteen geriatric 
females because he solicited you. But it’s infra 
dignitatem to solicit a voyager from another star.” 

“I feel like a prostitute when I chase authors.” 

“Your nobility is inspiring,” she snorted, snapping a 
newspaper open and terminating the conversation. 

I lapsed into a funk. Gazing at the ceiling with its 
spiderweb tracery of hairline cracks, I brooded on the 
unfairness of a world that handsomely rewarded 
prostitutes like Buddy Alter with penthouse apartments, 
second homes in the Hamptons, and Rolls Royce 
automobiles, but rewarded virtuous fellows like me with 
cramped apartments, seven year old Fords, and wives 
who had not enjoyed a genuine vacation in eight years. 

Ultimately I stood stoutly on my moral superiority 
and opted for the role of spectator. My wife, God bless 
her, never said another word about the matter. She didn’t 
have to. Her feelings were painfully implicit in her sighs 
and baleful looks every time the news carried another 
story of the bidding wars for the Drunians’ exclusive 
story, product endorsement, or participation in one 
commercial scheme or another. 

After two or three months, however, it began to be 
apparent that no one had succeeded in signing the 
spacefarers. Newspaper accounts and media industry 
gossip indicated that the Drunians were being extremely 
wary. Whether out of confusion or distrust it was not yet 
clear. Whatever motivated them, they definitely were not 
biting at offers that would have made even a Michael 
Jackson envious. Their caution should not have come as 
such a surprise. Anyone sophisticated enough to develop 
a means of interstellar propulsion must presumably be 
shrewd enough to know when he is being hustled. As my 
Random House friend observed, “Hell, their race is 
twenty million years old, so we know they weren’t bom 
yesterday.” He was one of innumerable shell-shocked 
veterans of the bidding wars returning to corporate 
headquarters with nothing to show for months in the 
field but a lot of bills for airfare, hotel accommodations, 
bar tabs, and diarrhea medicine. 

What we now realize is they were simply studying 
us. They had been attracted to our world by the radio 
signals broadcast by our Search for Extra Terrestrial 
Intelligence program, and for the first few weeks after 
their landing they established communications with our 
computers. Quickly reassuring us that their intentions 
were not hostile, they began requesting digitized 
information about all earthly things. We were thrilled to 
oblige, and they consumed data at a prodigious rate. 
They easily learned several dozen human languages, and 
began communicating with reporters in their native 
tongues by means of linguistic conversion devices. 
Presently they ventured out of the bays of their craft, 
their elephantine forms gliding with majestic dignity on 
furry pods, and, to the universal joy of the entire human 
race, the Intergalactic Epoch was born in that New 
Guinea field. All this is on film. 



70 



GALAXY 



What is not on film is the expression on my face 
when the phone rang about a month later and a 
low-pitched metallic voice announced, “Mr. Gordon? 
This is Garto of Drune.” The sound was obviously 
rendered by some sort of speech simulator, but I 
suspected something else. “Okay Eddie, stop screwing 
around. What do you want?” 

“Who’s that, dear?” My wife called from the 
kitchen. 

“My brother, up to his usual unfunny pranks. He’s 
talking into a cooking pot and expects me to believe it’s 
the guy from outer space. Eddie, we’re just sitting down 
to din .... ” 

“This is Garto, Mr. Gordon. No joke.” 

“Tell him you’ll call him back,” my wife shouted. 
“The chicken will get cold.” 

“I’ll get back to you, okay, Garto ? Is there a number 
on the space ship where I can reach you?” 

“Now it’s you who are joking,” the voice said. 
“Listen, chum, if you’re Garto, send me a sign.” 

I had no sooner uttered the words than a shriek came 
from the kitchen and a horrible clatter of a metal tray 
crashing to the floor. I dropped the phone and rushed to 
the kitchen. On the floor was a live chicken flapping and 
squawking. Standing on the counter was my wife, also 
flapping and squawking. 

Trembling, I picked up the extension in the kitchen. 
“Okay, Mister, you have my attention.” 

“I am Garto.” 

“I’ll accept that as a working thesis.” 

“I wish to tell the story of my people, of our world, 
of my voyage.” 

“Could you talk a little louder? There’s a woman 
screaming in here.” 

He repeated the message. “Now you definitely have 
my attention,” I said. I put my finger over my lips and 
my wife, sensing that something extraordinary was 
happening, fell silent. “And how may I be of help to 
you?” 

“I will need someone to represent me. You are 
universally admired, and from all we have been able to 
learn, you are an honest man. We have encountered very 
few here.” 

My wife implored me with her eyes to explain what 
was going on. I cupped my hand over the phone. “It’s the 
guy from outer space. He wants me to be his agent.” 
“Sure,” she said. 

“If you need proof, I’ll ask him to turn you into a 
chicken, too.” 

“No, thank you.” 

“What do I have to do?” I asked into the phone. 
“Cancel your appointments and book a flight to New 
Guinea. I will contact you tomorrow to arrange details of 
our meeting.” 

“I will do so. But you owe me a chicken dinner for 
two.” 

As I hung up, the doorman buzzed us. My wife 
picked up the intercom. Her eyes widened. 



“Who is it?” I asked. 

“Maxie’s Barbecue is on the way up,” she said. 
“With chicken dinner for two.” 

And that is how I came to be the literary agent and 
personal manager of Garto and his contingent of 
Drunians. I will not go into the details of my trip to New 
Guinea and my personal experiences in getting to know 
the explorers from that distant world. Nor will I amplify 
on the way I created a business strategy for them, 
conducted their negotiations, and exploited their stories 
in every possible medium. It’s fascinating, but not 
pertinent to this account. And besides. I’ve chronicled it 
in my memoir, “Agent to the Starfarers.” I cannot, 
however, resist the temptation to state that my clients 
made me a rich man, my agent colleagues became 
practically apoplectic with envy, and my wife treated me 
with a renewed respect bordering on reverence. I tried 
not to be insufferably smug with her, and succeeded 
most of the time. 

When did it all go wrong, then? Well, when in the 
long sad chronicle of human history have things always 
gone wrong? When people get greedy, that’s when. You 
would think that the countless publishers, movie studios, 
cable and television networks, media producers, product 
developers, commercial sponsors, and lawyers would 
have been content with the fortunes they made on the 
licenses I negotiated with them. But no, they couldn’t let 
it go at that. 

The big trouble began when Garto summoned me to 
Texas (where Disney had indeed established a theme 
park around the Drunian spacecraft). We hadn’t talked 
face to face for six months; our frequent but routine 
conversations were usually conducted by telephone or 
televideo. Obviously the matter he had to take up with 
me was far from routine: I could tell from the agitated 
timbre of his voice, even though communicated through 
his translation device. I caught the next plane to 
Houston. 

I felt like a movie star on opening night as a guard 
ushered me up the spacecraft’s ramp before the stares of 
thousands of fairground visitors. I found Garto in his 
chamber, the room redolent of his sweet-sour aroma to 
which I had never quite become accustomed. On the 
table before him were stacks of documents which I 
immediately recognized as book and movie contracts, as 
well as royalty statements issued by publishers, movie 
companies, and the countless merchandise firms that had 
licensed the rights to Drunian toys, games, clothes, 
furniture, tapes and records, and every other exploitable 
form of Druniana that the resourceful minds of business 
people can conjure. 

“You have reviewed these?” he said without 
salutation. 

“Of course.” 

“You know then that they are phony.” 

I sat up sharply and paused to choose my reply 
carefully. “My accountants routinely audit them and 
have found no major discrepancies, Garto.” 



THE CLIENT FROM HELL 



71 



“They represent a fraction of what these works have 
actually earned. Where is the rest of our money?” 

I picked a bunch of the papers up and examined 
them, finding nothing out of the ordinary. 

“Perhaps you have misunderstood or misinterpreted 
the figures?” 

He extended a pod and tapped a publisher’s royalty 
statement. “Half of the money due on sales of this book 
are not reported.” 

I uttered a sigh of relief as I immediately saw what 
was troubling him. “I had told you at the outset that 
publishers sell books on consignment. They always hold 
back royalties to authors in case copies are returned.” 
“There are few returns of my books,” Garto 
declared. I accepted this statement at face value. I had 
never doubted that Garto had ways of obtaining 
confidential information that was inaccessible to literary 
agents and other mere mortals. 

“Perhaps your publishers have been overly zealous 
in withholding some of your money,” I said. “Is 
something else bothering you?” 

“They promised me an embossed foil cover. And my 
author’s photo is blurry. But that is of no consequence 
compared to the missing royalties.” 

“No, I don’t suppose it is. What else?” 

He pushed another pile of papers at me. “Where are 
the rest of my movie profits?” he demanded. 

“I told you about that, too, Garto, when you 
originally asked me to represent you.” 

“Remind me.” 

“Movie profits are calculated on a net basis, after 
deduction of certain defined expenses. The theatre 
owners take a piece of every ticket sold at the box office, 
the distributor takes a bite, the movie studio writes off all 
sorts of deductible items and overhead . .” 

Garto cut me off with a majestic wave of his pod. 
“They are all lining their pockets every step of the way.” 
“That’s show biz,” I quipped, hoping to lighten the 
atmosphere a bit, for the air was crackling with danger. 
“Seriously, Garto, movie studio accountants are among 
the most creative members of the human race. They have 
siphoned money from profit participants from the very 
beginning of the industry.” 

“That is neither an acceptable explanation nor a 
satisfactory excuse. I understand capitalism perfectly 
well and respect the desires of business firms to earn 
reasonable profits on their investment. The profits being 
earned by publishers, movie companies, and other 
licensees are flagrantly unreasonable, however. I want 
what is coming to me and my crewmates. And, by the 
way, they reneged on their promise of a full screen credit 
as technical consultant, and they never reimbursed my 
per diem expenses on location in Georgia.” 

“Rectifying that will be easier than making a studio 
cough up profits,” I said. “You’re looking at a long and 
honorable tradition of institutionalized fraud.” 

“If you cannot accomplish this, I will have to wonder 
whether, perhaps, even you are benefiting from these 



diversions of my funds.” 

“My friend, I am appalled that you should even think 
such a thing.” 

“I want what is coming to me,” he repeated. 

“I will do what I can, Garto.” 

“You’ll do more than that,” he said. “And you’ll do 
it within one week from this hour.” 

The latter was stated in a deadly flat tone that I had 
never heard in his voice before, but it chilled me to the 
marrow of my bones. So staggered was I by this ominous 
warning that it did not occur to me to ask what remedy 
he contemplated if I failed to carry out my mandate of 
redressing his grievance. For this oversight it appears 
that the human race is about to pay dearly. 

You will not be surprised to learn that I have spent 
the six and a half days and nights since that moment 
exerting the most determined effort in the history of the 
literary agents’ profession to persuade publishers, movie 
executives, and merchandise manufacturers to refund the 
profits that Garto considered to be excessive. Most of 
you reading this narrative have the good fortune never to 
have encountered the mentality of accountants in the 
publishing and entertainment field, so you will simply 
have to take my word for it that my blandishments were 
greeted with derision to say the least. More common 
were the cynical jokes, at which I would have laughed 
had not the matter been as grave and urgent as it was. 
Indeed, in the good old, pre-Garto days, I had laughed at 
such jokes, and made up a few myself. 

But I could not impress any of Garto’s accounts 
payable that this was not merely a case of some naive 
author bitching that the system was gypping him. My 
week of imploring, cajoling, and threatening yielded not 
a dime of reparations. One movie president summed up 
the prevailing attitude when he sneered, “Screw him! If 
he doesn’t like the way we do business, he can zap us 
with his little ray gun.” 

Which brings us to what I believe to be the last 
moment of the human race. I calculate that we have 
about a half hour. The Drunian craft hovers in the 
stratosphere, its “little ray gun” (or whatever weapon it 
employs) trained on our planet and its frail populace of 
fools and knaves. When it became clear, about an hour 
ago, that Garto had not been bluffing, I was inundated by 
panicky phone calls from many of Garto’s debtors 
pressing settlements upon me. Their offers were in vain. 
Garto had stopped taking my phone calls. 

As the clock moves inexorably toward doomsday, I 
am consumed by a single thought: could Buddy Alter 
have structured Garto’s deals any better than I did? 

—RICHARD CURTIS 

galaxy 

SUlSSCRIBE NOW - 1-800-8W-0658 



72 



GALAXY 




JUST RUBBERFACE 
AND ME 

By E. JAY O’CONNELL 

Illustrated by S. Gold 

fine spray of freezing rain stung my face as I 
II turned up Boylston, walking towards the library. 
^ V An image formed in my mind, of a little girl with 
a tuft of blonde hair slicked across her left eye. So still. 
Too still. I shivered and picked up the pace. Please don ’t 
let it happen now. 

The heat rising up through the grate couldn’t 
compete with the driving cold, but at the moment, I 
didn’t care. I shook a vial of fugue from the ziploc and 
popped it into the shunt in my left forearm, watching as 
my blood mixed slowly with the amber drug. Satisfied it 
was working properly, I zipped the fleshy seal closed and 
pushed myself against the wall, trying to get out of the 
worst of the rain. 

I’d spent the day down at the reclamation center, 
picking stuff from the waste stream and tossing it down 
the appropriate holes. 

Across the grate from me, a couple of worn out 
drunks in gray government issue were sharing a bottle, 
oblivious to the cold. What a stupid drug. I hate drunks. 

I sighed, long and low, as the fugue hit my heart with 
a raw punch of pleasure. The continuous feed implant 



said a lot about me. As much as I needed to know, 
anyway. They were expensive, so I’d come from money. 
I was broke now, so something bad had happened, and I 
didn’t want to remember it. 

And I wouldn’t, at least for a while. 

The sleet finally decided to turn to rain, and the wind 
whipped it around the library overhang like it wasn’t 
there, soaking me to the skin. I closed my eyes. Who was 
I, again? I didn’t remember. 

Life was good. 

Blackness, dark and sweet, surrounded me. I slept in 
the quiet warmth, floating in smooth wet emptiness. A 
sharp pain intruded, sending crackling waves of ugly red 
light through the black. My eyelids fluttered open, and I 
saw a green plastic boot jammed into my stomach. 

“Go ’way.” 

The person attached to the boot hunkered down next 
to me. Plastic lensed eyes peered out of a face that might 
have been handsome had it been real. A rubberface. 

“Get up.” His voice was a metallic buzz. “You’re 
dying.” 

“Maybe I want to die.” 

“No you don’t.” 

I couldn’t think of a retort for that, because it was 
true. Instead, I extended a numb white hand toward the 
figure crouched in the rain, who hauled me erect with 
ease. I didn’t weigh much anymore. 

I took one teetering step forward and fell flat on my 
face. 

I woke up warm and dry in bed, wrapped in a 
scratchy wool blanket. My fingertips and toes tingled 
violently, making me think sickly of frostbite and 
gangrene. 

The basement room was small and clean, illuminated 
by a single bare bulb and the weak light sifting through 
the cobwebbed halfwindow near the ceiling. A battered 
laundry sink and a wooden cable spool table with two 
plastic lawnchairs were the only furniture other than the 
bed. All four walls were covered with plank shelves 
supported by cinderblocks, piled high with old, static 
books. 

Rubberface stood at the table stirring a pot of 
something on a hot plate. He turned and smiled. God, 
they gave me the creeps. From a distance, the prosthesis 
passed for a face, but close up, you could tell it was fake. 
The mask worked like an artificial limb. These burned 
out, burned up vets were a pretty common sight on the 
streets. 

I checked my fingers and toes for frostbites to avoid 
having to look at him. I’d been stripped to my shorts, and 
probably bathed as well. 

“Your feet are fine,” he buzzed. His larynx must 
have been destroyed in the war, because his voice was 
one of those cheap synth units, with only the barest hint 
of inflection. “Pink and healthy. You’re lucky.” 

I squeezed a toe, blood reddening the grayish skin. It 




JUST RUBBERFACE AND ME 



73 



hurt like hell, but that was probably good. “Yeah. Lucky 
is my goddamn middle name.” 

“Very lucky.” He poured the contents of the 
saucepan into a chipped blue mug, added a spoon, and 
passed it to me. The smell triggered a ravenous hunger. 

The stuff was good, vegetable stew in a brown 
gravy, thick with potatoes and carrots, flavored with a lot 
of garlic. I polished it off quickly, scalding the roof of 
my mouth in the process. “More?” 

Rubberface shook his head, grinning. “No. Sorry. I 
don’t want to clean your puke off the floor. Maybe in the 
morning.” 

That irritated me, though he was probably right. 
“Why did you pick me up?” I was worried that he was 
going to try to whip some religion on me, something I 
couldn’t stand. Other less savory thoughts came to mind, 
but I pushed them away. 

He nodded as if he understood. “I need your help.” 
“What?” I laughed weakly, and closed my eyes, my 
tongue investigating my scalded upper palate, gently 
probing the grainyness there. “I’m a fuguer for Christ’s 
sake.” 

“I know what you are. I’m conducting a study.” 

The stew warmed my stomach, spilling lassitude into 
my blood. I couldn’t keep my eyes open, but I managed 
another snicker. “Nice lab you got here . ...” I didn’t 
know his name. “What’s your name?” 

“What does it matter?” He paused, his face in 
neutral, and asked, “What do you call yourself?” 

“I make it my business not to remember.” 

That laugh again. “Then just call me Rubberface. 
You babbled some in your sleep. I think your name is 
Joe.” 

The name meant nothing to me. “Good,” I said, and 
meant it. “Good to have something to call each other.” 

He may have said something else, but I was fast 
asleep. 

I remember watching a big spider build a web in the 
rafters near the window, taking it in with all the patience 
of a time-lapse camera. Rubberface sat down on the cot 
beside me, and watched awhile, too. 

One gray morning, I felt like moving. Rubberface 
was gone again. 

I climbed out of the cot and put on the government 
issue baggies piled at the foot of the bed, wincing at the 
coarseness of the fabric. It took several minutes of 
stretching to work the kinks from my cramped body. My 
name was still lost to me, which was good. Very good. 

1 searched the place methodically, checking every 
book, riffling the pages, coughing at the mustiness 
wafting from the yellowed leaves. Nothing. No fugue. 
No money to buy more. On a whim, I shoved the spool 
table against the wall, discovering a metal panel cut into 
the concrete. Bingo. 

I just barely had the strength to lift the heavy panel, 
by its rusty iron ring. Inside the cubby was a burlap sack. 



fairly heavy, filled with angular forms that clicked as I 
hauled it up and spilled it onto the cold cement. 

A dozen paperweight sized cubes of clear plastic 
skittered across the floor. I picked one up, a mild electric 
feeling shivering up my fingers as I turned it over in the 
weak light, peering into it. 

A tiny face peered back at me, a toothless old man, 
his features twisting in disgust and horror. It was the best 
hologram I’d ever seen; no rainbow glints, or digital 
rubbery smoothness. 

As I held it, a sick feeling welled up in my stomach. 
The face. I recognized the face. A scratchy voice echoed 
weakly in my head. “I didn’t mean to hit her so hard. I 
loved her ... The cube slipped from my hand, 
clattering to the cement. 

I closed my eyes for a moment, and then repacked 
the bag quickly, trying not to look too closely at the 
things. Every slowly writhing face wore the same 
horrified expression. An old black woman gaped from a 
cube under the table, her mouth a howling pink oval. I 
grabbed it and stuffed it in the sack, again feeling that 
little shock, and hearing a voice, this time an inarticulate 
keening. 

Shaking, I returned the room to its original state. I 
hadn’t the slightest idea what the damn things were. I 
didn’t want to know. 

I lay back in bed, the funk returning like the tide. I’d 
recognized the old man in the first cube from the library, 
a fellow fuguer. He’d shared a vial with me once. 

And as much as it made no sense, I couldn’t get the 
thought out of my mind, that he was alive in there, and in 
pain. And that I should do something, to try to help. 

I spent the next day flipping through the static books. 
An ingrained habit that the fugue hadn’t touched caused 
me to brush at the lower right-hand corner of the page, 
and wait for the display to refresh. I kept tapping terms 
for footnotes and annotations, but after a while I 
remembered to turn the pages. The collection was 
random, probably garbage-picked. Old college psych 
texts rubbed elbows with romance novels, UFO books, 
and yesterday’s popular trash. 

The old man’s face from the cube lingered nastily in 
my mind. I remembered suddenly that he’d shown me 
how to pick through the dumpsters using a stick instead 
of my hands, and he’d let me help him with some of the 
more profitable bins, near the university 

The sudden burst of memory was alarming. I didn’t 
have much longer before it all came back. Rubberface 
pushed in after dark as I was leafing through an old news 
magazine. When he saw me sitting up on the bed, he 
raised his eyebrows. 

“Dressed, I see.” 

“Yeah. Thanks. Thanks a lot.” I shuffled towards the 
door, gesturing helplessly. “But 1 gotta go.” 

He didn’t move. “I need your help.” 

“Look, I didn’t ask for your help, okay? So please 
don’t ask for mine. I have to go.” 1 stood there, clenching 



74 



GALAXY 



and unclenching my fists, wondering if he had any 
money, wondering if I could get it from him. I 
remembered that he’d carried me here; he looked strong. 
“Where are you going?” 

“You know where I’m going.” 

He shook his head. “You don’t have any money.” 

“I’ll get some.” 

He produced a wad of well-worn two dollar chips 
from a pouch in his belt, and laid it on the table between 
us. Rubberfaces made great beggars. “I’ll give you the 
money, if you want it. After you listen to what I have to 
say.” 

I considered making a grab for it and running, but 
decided against it. 

“You’re almost finished.” 

I sighed. I’d heard that before. 

“You know how this stuff works on trauma cases?” 
He rapped the table with a mottled knuckle. “Pay 
attention, boy. Every time you remember, the pain gets 
more intense. Fugue erodes ego. Every time the memory 
returns, there’s less of you there to deal with it, so you 
need it worse. Vicious cycle. It ends in one of three 
ways.” 

He held up a finger. “Suicide. You won’t be able to 
wait another minute for the dose, and you’ll snuff 
yourself out in the most direct means available.” 

He raised another finger “Statue. You know what a 
statue feels? Friend of mind — psych nurse — told me. 
They’d shocked a few awake, for awhile. A statue’s 
mind, caught in the repressed memory, is overwhelmed 
and starts to loop. The memory plays forever. Your 
nightmare — what you’re running from — spinning 
forever like a stuck record in your brain. I can’t think of 
a better description of hell, can you?” 

Rubberface waited, the cash in front of him, his latex 
features as impassive as a Halloween mask. I didn’t stop 
to think why I believed him. I just did. “What’s the other 
option? You said there were three.” 

“Integration. You let the memories come back. Try 
and live with them. I can help you do it. You have to 
trust me.” 

The hunger was building, and I knew in a matter of 
minutes or hours I’d have no choice. I’d take the money. 
And end up, what — like the old man in the cube? 

The rainbow eagle hologram on the top bill 
shimmered with a fierce intensity, the colors bitingly 
bright, the beginning of an aura. My memory was 
coming back. It always did, and always would. What was 
the point in running, if it was going to catch me in the 
end? 

I steadied myself. “I’ll try it,” I croaked. “How 
Rubberface pulled something from a box on one of 
the shelves, strips of cloth and rubber, reinforced with 
smooth steel rivets. “Restraints.” 

“Do I need those?” 

“Yes. You need them.” He fit my hands into the 
molded rubber grips, and tightened straps across the 
knuckles. 



“Once had a man break free and tear his eyes out. 
Don’t worry, these will hold.” 

My stomach slowly writhed, as the aura intensified. I 
gulped down a mouthful of saliva. “What do I do now?” 
“Talk.” 

My name was Joseph Peters Dunn. “About what?” 
“What you remember.” 

Terror welled up in me, prickling the hairs on the 
back of my neck. This was a terrible mistake. The girl’s 
face floated in my mind, blonde hair, slack lips, glazed 
eyes. So still. 

“I don’t want to do this anymore.” 

Rubberface shook his head. “Sorry. You made the 
decision. Now you have to live with it. You’ll have to 
live with all of your decisions soon.” 

“No.” There was a roaring in my ears, an SST 
overhead, coming down over Logan. But the sound just 
got louder, and louder, and louder, until I was sure that 
the thing would crash through the ceiling. The white 
noise filled my ears, my head, a directionless roar 
blotting out everything. The room faded, blacking in 
from the edges like a pupil irising closed. 

Something within me cringed as I touched the 
doorknob. 

“Honey, I’m home!” A little joke. Very little. 

“It’s all right.” I heard a voice somewhere say. “You 
lived through this once.” I opened the door. 

Linda’s voice came from the kitchen. 

“Oh, is it that late . ?” 

Dolly through the freshly vacuumed living and 
dining room to the kitchen. Expensive furniture, modem, 
deco, sterile, an ebony table surrounded by tall, skeletal 
chairs designed by the Marquis de Sade. 

She was at the sink, scrubbing something, the circles 
under her eyes even darker than the day before. She was 
wearing an old pair of my jeans rolled up at the ankles, 
and one of my ancient Yale T-shirts. 

The Bible was open on the kitchen table. It was the 
Old Testament, again, with the same damn passage 
glowing in yellow highlighter. 

“We’re meeting Bill and Kathy at the club for dinner 
tonight, don’t you remember?” Her slack expression told 
him she didn’t. Her memory had been worthless since 
the new medication. 

She nodded listlessly. “All right. I’ll get ready.” She 
emptied a plastic bucket of water into the sink. The 
foamy liquid swirled and gurgled down the drain. It was 
pink. But the bottle of detergent next to the bucket was 
yellow. 

Someone, somewhere, said no. 

Rubberface wiped my forehead with a cold rag. 

“Let me go.” 

“You’ll follow the thread back, back to the 
beginning. Then you integrate.” 

I felt like I was going to vomit. “Don’t want to.” 
“How do you know you don’t want to?” 



JUST RUBBERFACE AND ME 



75 



“It’s a feeling, can’t describe it. Like the telephone 
ringing — you know it’s bad news even before you pick 
it up. Like that.” 

The room began blacking out again. I started to cry. 

I loosened my tie and kissed Linda’s forehead. 
“Come up and take a shower with me?” I waggled my 
eyebrows as she frowned, and went back to the 
scrubbing. We didn’t do that anymore. As I got 
undressed in the bathroom I noticed a spot of fuzzy 
blueness in the bottom of the toilet. Something clicked. 

It was Linda’s new medication. 

“Honey, where’s the kid?” I shouted. “I’ll go pick up 
the sitter while you get ready.” 

“I think she’s sleeping.” 

I showered and shaved, put on a crushed red velvet 
bathrobe Linda had given me for Christmas. 

Elisa’s TV was tuned to a sitcom, intermittent waves 
of canned laughter rolling through the room. She was in 
bed, the covers pulled up to her neck. I turned off the set, 
the screen quickly shrinking to a pinpoint of 
phosphorescence that glared at me accusingly. 

I sat on the edge of the bed. The room was utterly 
quiet. Elisa was motionless under the quilted bedspread, 
mouth slightly askew, a tuft of blonde hair stuck to her 
left eye. It looked uncomfortable. 

“Elisa, honey, wake up.” There was the roar of a jet 
flying overhead, loud, which was funny, because we 
weren’t in any approach path. I leaned over to brush the 
hair from her eye, and felt the warm wetness slick my 
other palm where I was supporting myself. 

And a bloody handprint bled through the fabric. 

And my head exploded in a sparkling burst of hot 
white light. 

Rubberface stood over me, mechanically slapping 
me in the face. His hand struck my head, rocking it to the 
right, causing another flare of brilliance. He raised his 
hand to deliver another blow, and paused looking in my 
eyes. 

“Awake?” 

I nodded vigorously. “Yes! Now, get the hell off me, 
you goddamn mannequin! You’re going to let me loose 
and give me that goddamn money — ” 

“Shut up. That was it, last time. You were turning to 
stone. Another dose, you don ’t forget, you remember! 
Everything and for always!” 

My throat ached so badly 1 could hardly swallow. 
The memory was making me physically ill. I’d 
integrated all right. It was all there. Elisa wasn’t the only 
dead one. Getting Linda back on the medication had only 
let her know the enormity of her crime. I remembered 
holding her, sobbing, for hours, as she babbled about 
God. She had waited patiently for God to tell her to put 
down the knife, as he had with Abraham. 

Only he hadn’t. 

I remembered Linda’s suicide, the blood in the sink, 
everything, every little thing. 



“It wasn’t your fault.” Rubberface’s eyes burned into 
me. They had a hypnotic quality. Not quite human. 

“ft was! I knew she wasn’t taking the pills. And I’d 
seen the Bible, open to that passage for days.” 

“You couldn’t have known. She was insane.” 

“She’d always been insane! I knew that when I 
married her!” The tears were rolling down my face 
freely, “ft was my job to make sure something like this 
didn’t happen.” 

I began to jerk at my bonds savagely, bruising my 
wrists and ankles against the restraints. “Let me go.” 

He nodded, reached out and touched my forehead. 
The pain stopped then, as if cut off by a switch. The 
memories were still there, but they didn’t matter, 
somehow. 

“What the hell did you do to me?” 

“Temporary anesthesia. It’ll wear off.” He began 
unbuckling the restraints. When he had freed both my 
hands, and was bending down to release my legs, I 
swung at him mindlessly. My fist hooked the edge of the 
mask, and sent it flying across the room. 

He looked back at me, his face a twisted mass of 
purple keloid, his lower jaw partly gone, glistening 
patches of cauterized bone peeking through the runneled 
flesh. Black, bloody wires, the nerve hookups, protruded 
from his cheeks and forehead in clumps. 

But even hiding behind plastic lenses, it was obvious 
that the thing living in that ruined body wasn’t exactly 
human. He scrabbled briefly for the mask, picked it up, 
holding it for several seconds before sighing and tossing 
it on the table. 

He stared at me, and again, I was overwhelmed by 
the sense of his otherness. “People never look too 
closely at the mask,” he said softly, his synthetic voice 
suddenly more modulated, more human. “That’s why I 
wear it. Did you know your people have senses of which 
they’re not aware?” 

I was shivering non-stop now. 1 hugged myself 
tightly, and tried to stop. “What are you?” 

“Policeman? Social worker? Trade liaison? You 
don’t have the language for what I am.” 

I’m not sure how I knew. Maybe he was a little bit 
inside my mind, helping me to understand. “You’re not 
from Earth?” 

“No.” Somehow, through all the scars, he managed a 
smile, ft was mainly around the eyes. “Not from Earth.” 
“What’s the deal with the cubes?” 

“They’re sleepwalkers, turned to stone. Processed 
locally into a . well, I guess you’d call it an 
entertainment product.” 

“What?” 

“There is a species — I must confess, I can’t stand 
them. They’re mental vampires. Pain junkies. Parasites. 
They became the dominant lifeform on a planet with 
three sapient races, by manipulating them from within, 
using pleasure and pain. They like pain the best. 
Emotional pain more than physical. Your species has a 
great capacity for pain . .” He trailed off. 



76 



GALAXY 



“I still don’t know what you’re talking about.” 

He rubbed the side of his head. “The cubes are candy 
for a very unpleasant people. There has been a trade. 
Several of your governments and major corporations are 
involved.” 

“What are you doing with me?” 

“You’re evidence, Joe.” 

My hand strayed to the tiny bump on the back of my 
head. I pressed on it, but it didn’t hurt. It had never hurt. 

He nodded slowly. “A recording.” 

I worked my fingernails through the thin layer of 
skin, my thumbnail sliding under a round flat disk inside 
the bump. The tab resisted, and then, sickeningly, gave. 
As I drew it out, the room fell away as if I had 
plummeted off a building. 

I found myself sitting on a bed in a strange 
book-lined room, staring at a rubberface. I hate 
rubberfaces. A strand of crystal glittered between my 
thumb and forefinger, lit from within by slowly dancing 
flecks of golden radiance. What the hell was this? 

The rubberface took the glowing crystal from my 
outstretched hand. There was mild pressure at the base of 
my skull and the memory of the last couple of days slid 
into place. 

“Jesus!” 

“There is no crime without context,” he said, turning 
to run a finger across a row of book spines. “I should 
never have read these. That was the big mistake. Losing 
the proper detachment.” He sighed loudly. “I can’t do 
it.” 

“Do what?” 

“Treat you as an animal. You are almost-human.” I 
felt those eyes again, bearing down on me mercilessly. 
“Joe, I can see a little into the future. Not very far, but 
far enough. Once I leave here with that core — your 
memory of these last few days — you don’t live. I’m 
almost certain.” 

I considered that. “If I give you the core, will the 
trade stop?” 

Rubberface nodded slowly. “Perhaps.” 

“Don’t you have other cores? You said you’ve done 
this before.” 

“Nothing like yours,” he said, staring into my eyes. 
“Without it . .” 

“I see.” I looked away. A fly buzzed against the 
window, annoyingly rebounding off the dirty glass over 
and over again. Finally giving up, it blundered into a 
spiderweb, struggling as a large brown spider descended 
from the rafters. The spider enfolded it, the fly’s 
movements weakening as it was cocooned. 

But it wasn’t dead, just paralyzed. 

“You can have the core.” 

A short while later, we were ready to go. Rubberface 
had made some kind of report, his eyes blank, his throat 
muscles twitching, for about five minutes. I had one 
more bowl of his stew. 

As I put on an overcoat, he offered me something. I 



picked the vial from his outstretched palm. 

“Fugue?” 

He nodded, his eyes calm. “Something very like it. 
More of a therapeutic drug, really. Your people have 
very little control over consciousness. I’ve yet to 
encounter an intelligent species as enslaved to memory 
as yours . .” he shook his head. “Use it if you have to. 
It ... it won’t be as bad as the other.” 

The vial began to grow warm in my hand. “What?” 

“Put it on the table.” 

I did, and watched as it slowly melted into the wood, 
glowing yellow and green, before coalescing again. Now 
there were two vials of fugue sitting in a little depression 
in the table, connected by a silvery thread. 

“I’ve already given out a few of them. They fission 
once every three hours, once separated. The fugue 
market should collapse by the end of the month.” 

I screwed my eyes up, peering at him carefully. “Is 
this allowed? Isn’t there some sort of prime directive, or 
something, for you guys?” 

“Yes. Oddly enough, there is.” 

I fingered the storycube nervously as the train 
shrieked through Chinatown station. It was late. The only 
other passengers were bums like me, and a scattering of 
college students too drunk or stupid to realize how 
dangerous it was, this time of night. 

The numbness, Rubberface’s temporary anesthesia, 
is gone now, and I feel much better. I could probably live 
with it, now, what I did, or rather, what I failed to do. 
But I’ve made my decision. He says that there’s always a 
chance that he’s wrong, that I’ll manage to shake off the 
addiction. 

He says the future is never certain. 

All he’d tell me was that if I statued, I wouldn’t 
suffer. We got off the train at New England Medical, and 
rode the escalator up to the tunnel in silence. 

“I can retrieve the data from the cube remotely.” 

We reached the corridor. “Yeah. Well, bye.” 1 
reached out my hand. He looked at it, smiled with his 
eyes, and grasped it firmly. It felt like a real hand. I sat 
down quickly on the brick, and lowered my head to my 
knees, the cube held tightly between my palms. 1 didn’t 
want him to see the tears in my eyes. 

He brushed the back of my head. 

1 came to, sitting in a brick corridor. Disoriented, I 
tried to figure out where the hell I was. The distant click 
of steel wheels and the smell of urine brought me back. 
Subway tunnel. Someone was standing above me, 
looking down, a rubberface in a gray overcoat. I hate 
rubberfaces. 

“What the hell are you looking at, dummy?” 

He just nodded stupidly and shambled off down the 

hall. 

I remembered my name was Joe Dunn, the aura 
fizzing and buzzing like mad. I would remember a lot 
more, soon, if I didn’t do something. There was this 



JUST RUBBERFACE AND ME 



77 



thing in my hand, a cube, featureless black. A 
paperweight maybe? Might be worth something. I 
slipped it into my shirt for safekeeping. 

I fumbled in my pocket. Please, let me have some, 
please. 

My fingers closed on a single vial. Smiling, I tugged 
open my forearm and popped it in. The shunt was clear. I 
closed it up and waited. 



family spread out before me. Linda's new medication 
seems to be working, thank God. 

In this instant, I know that I love them both. 

Birds fly by overhead, frozen immobile. The breeze 
carries the scent of lilac and freshly mowed grass. The 
moment goes on and on. It occurs to me that I feel good, 
very good. 

In fact, I’ve never felt better in my life. 



It 's a late spring day. Elisa is running up the slope to 
where Linda is smiling, kneeling down to sweep her up 
into her arms. The grass squirms between my naked toes, 
the food is warm in my stomach, the air is sweet. My 
vacation is just beginning, two workless weeks with my 



— E. JAY O’CONNELL 



ERRATA: In Issue 6, the GALAXY AUDIO PROJECT listing did 
not and should have included for Tape 3: H.L. Gold's ‘The 

Biography Project* and Janni Lee Simner*s *Three Wish Habit* and 
for for Tape 2: Don Webb*s »The Words, The Names.* 



Galaxy stories 



available on tape III 



Galaxy 





Catherine Oxenberg, Director 
Photo: E.J. Gold 



In production, "The Proper Thing to Do" by 
Brad Linaweaver, "The Source of Inspiration" 
by Michael Decker, "Seven Soup Rivers" by 
Robert Sheckley, "Avatar" by Janet Berliner, 
"The Forgotten Ones" by Lyn Nichols, 
"Reality Clay" by John Rosenman, "Ms ... 
Found ..." by Mary Sass, "Sacrifice" by L.S. 
Silverthorne, "Dances with Elves" and "Iced" 
by Cynthia Ward, "Yule" by K.D. Wentworth, 
"Nuts and Bolts" by Greg Vose, "Mahoghany 
Dream" by David Bollinger, "Ghost Maker" by 
Frederik Polil, and more 



Informal readings by selected individuals including GAP Director, 
actress/writer Catherine Oxenberg and actor/writer James P. Healy. 
Science fiction, fantasy and horror stories. Recorded, digitally mastered 
and produced in the Galaxy hi-tech, multitrack recording studio. Best 
audiophile quality real time dubs. $15.00 each. Galaxy subscribers pay 
$10.00 each. 



GAP tape 001 
Wells of Wisdom 

Brad Linaweaver 

GAP tape 002 

Dragon Lady 

Evelyn E. Smith 

TheWordsThe Names 

Don Webh 

GAP tape 003 

Three Wish Habit 
Janni Lee Simner 
The Biography Project 
H.L (ini, I 
NothingChanges 

( buck Rothman 



The Vilbar Party 

Evelyn E. Smith 

The Fornicators 

B. Johnson-Haddad 

GAP tape 004 

Not Fit for Children 

Evelyn E. Smith 

Extraction 
Jeffry Dwight 
Perchance to Scream 

Janet llerliner 

GAP tape 005 

Mr. Monster Waits in 
Heaven for an Angel 

L orry Ackerman 



Ants in her Attic 

Kent Brewster 

GAP tape 006 

In the Canal Zone 

Jean Marie Stine 

The Big Chill 

Cynthia Wart I 

The Copper Ring 

Robert Houtlin 

Graveyard at the 
Grand 

.lunel llerliner 

GAP tape 007 

More Stately 
Mansions 

John Rosenman 



To order, call 1-800-869-0658 






OVERSEAS 1-916/432-1839 

Destined to become si elassie in 
every ssclence fiction 1 i l»rnry 



GALAXY SUBSCRIBER SPECIAL: Get a GALAXY mug and GALAXY AUDIO PROJECT tape for $16.95 



78 



GALAXY 




COKE BOTTLE 
LENSES 

By ROBERT E. ROGOFF 

Illustrated by Zoe 

eturning from her first season at the Academy, 
Rosemaryyh Randt hugged the squat, pruned, 
and wizened man and woman standing in the 
irised-open door. 

“Get in here out of the light,” urged her mother. Her 
father just grinned at the situation, as if sharing a secret 
with himself. 

Once inside, the family sat down and tendered idle 
catch-up chitchat as their reunion gifts. As the daylight 
outside slowly redded out into a spectacular Pacific 
Ocean sunset. Cadet Rosemaryyh slowly exhausted the 
supply of adventure stories she had accumulated. By 
contrast, the expansive years which her parents had 
shared, though less exciting, stretched into a relatively 
longer, much fuller-written tale of daily survival as 
things merely got better and better on Earth. 

Rosemaryyh finally had to say her goodnights, as it 
had been a tiresome journey crammed into the 
claustrophobic transport with all the other cadets coming 
out of rotation. She trundled into the bedroom she had 
left when her parents had been in their late thirties and 
she sixteen, and as she saw the same furniture, the same 



dinosaur-patterned wallpaper she had left behind as a 
teenager, a youthful warmth kindled within her cool, 
athletic body. She felt the bouncy cushioning when she 
plopped her lean frame onto the soft bed. 

She sighed and allowed her eyes to flutter. “Lights 
off,” she called. It was only when the lights stayed lit she 
remembered this room had a lamp that had to be 
switched off manually. Fingering the stud, picturing 
herself retaking her bed position in soothing darkness, 
she paused. 

Set upside-down on the dresser, coated with a thin 
veneer of dust, were the coke-bottle lensed eyeglasses 
she had used before her operation. She picked them up 
and cherished them in her slender-fingered hands, 
recalling how she had used them not only to see better 
but to look better. 

As an adolescent, her now-lanky frame had been 
pudgy, unauthoritarian. The strong frames turned her 
chubby-cheeked face into that of an owlish student, and 
for the first time in her young life, suddenly her 
schoolteachers began to call on her more regularly. As a 
result, she had accelerated her learning curve quickly and 
was rewarded richly. For today she was among the select 
few whose academic prowess had landed her a spot in 
the Academy. Her Cadet training was something not just 
anyone could tolerate, much less excel in. At the 
Academy, she was at the top of her class. 

Rosemaryyh started to replace the glasses, but then 
she got another idea. She was remembering more and 
more about her early school days now. Three-hundred 




COKE BOTTLE LENSES 



79 



sixty-five and one quarter. The sums of the squares of 
the sides. Equal and opposite reaction. Freed the slaves 
and assassinated. The penny in the glass. 

Stuck in remembrance, like a computer program 
going continuously in the background that refused to 
shut off, Rosemaryyh looked to the side, into the mirror 
which was there the way she knew it would be. She 
wiped around its surface so as to clear an opening in the 
dust and raised the glasses to her eyes. 

Unfortunately, now that her eyesight was perfect, the 
glasses only distorted her image and stabbed an ache 
through her head. Nauseous, she removed the glasses and 
was reassured to see her normal high-cheekboned 
twenty-year-old’s face gazing back at her from the 
dust-moted mirrorglass. She smiled at the handsome 
woman’s body she had grown into while off Earth, and 
set the glasses back down, right next to a dusty drinking 
glass which somehow had still survived the years 
untouched on her dresser, half-full of a brownish liquid. 

Involuntarily she giggled. The penny in the glass. 

Back in first grade again, pudgy little Rosemaryyh 
had fidgeted, bored in her tiny desk while the stern, 
white-haired teacher, Ms. Harddriver, stood at the front 
of the schoolroom, tapping the big, brown globe with her 
hard fingernails. “Class,” explained Ms. Harddriver, “Be 
sure never to overindulge in the ancient brew known as 
cola. Cola will rot your teeth — it’s full of something 
that will even — well, go home tonight and drop a 
copper penny into a glass of cola. Leave it there a month 
and then just you see what condition that poor metal coin 
is in!” 

Rosemaryyh now remembered she had gone home 
that night and started the experiment merely to prove the 




KGOD BARDOTOWN RADIO 



AROUND THE DIAL AROUND THE CLOCK 
•ONE-HOUR KGOD BROADCAST 
(Program 1 & 2) 

PLUS KGOD T-Shirt 

GET BOTH for only $24.95 

plus $3.50 shipping & handling. CA residents please add 
sales tax. KGOD T-Shirts available in M-L-XL. Black on Ash, 
or White on Black. Shirt sold separately: $15 plus $3 
shipping. Tape sold separately: $15 plus $2 shipping. 



teacher wrong. But being a first-grader, one distraction 
led to another and somehow the penny in the glass was 
totally forgotten to this day over a century later. 

She knew the acid in the cola would have completely 
dissolved that little coin by now. Edging around the lip 
of the glass with a finger, she threw back her head and 
laughed. But she wondered if the cola itself was still 
good. Tentatively, she raised the glass to her lips and 
sipped. 

That refreshing bite powered back a wonderful 
memory flow of warm, lazy summers on the beach, 
feathering smooth pebbles and delicate shells in her little 
hands. Drowsily, she forgot for a moment this glass had 
apparently been sitting over a century and gulped the 
remaining cola down. 

She nearly choked to death. 

She managed to cough the obstruction up. The 
penny. So, Ms. Harddriver had been lying, or mistaken, 
or joking, that fall day back in 2097. And suddenly, 
Rosemaryyh wondered not only about the penny in the 
glass, but about everything else. If the penny in the glass 
was not true, was the sums of the squares of the sides 
true? Was freed the slaves and assassinated true? 

Just what exactly was true? Rosemaryyh felt very 
small, very cold, and very, very stupid. And then she 
suddenly realized — there was an easy way to 
reality-test this situation. The year was now 2231. If the 
penny was dated 2097 or earlier, then Rosemaryyh 
would worry. 

Rosemaryyh flipped the coin to its obverse side and 
looked at the date. 

—ROBERT E. ROGOFF 





80 



GALAXY 




THE DEAD-END 

By JEAN MARIE STINE 

Illustrated by Finlay 

he last science fiction <writer>. Sat alone. 
Before the last <simulator>. And tried to 
<think>. 

There had once been a time. Of unlimited 
imagination. Of boundless potential. When anything was 
possible. When new dreams. A million possible futures. 
A thousand maybe worlds. Were minted everyday. 

The writer knew this. Had tracked it down. Through 
<records>. <Memory>. To the deepest cellular level. 
Science fiction. Fundamental part. Hume existence. 

The last science fiction <writer>. Sat alone. In a 
<room>. Without inspiration. Mind a blank. Unable to 
think of a single idea for a <story>. 

Knew <it> should be easy. Just pick a theme. 
<Dozen> of classic themes. In science fiction. 

There was the wonders of alien worlds . 

The writer <looked> out the <wall>. Quadruple 
shadows. Maroon skies. Airtrees — fronds growing 
downward toward the ground. Immense iridescent 



<whales> glazing high among their roots. The 
lighteningfalls that reared above the <domicile>. 

And could think of nothing exciting. Amazing. 
Fantastic. Or astounding. Enough. To justify beginning. 

There was time travel .... 

The writer’s <bondmate> appeared. “I join us. We’re 
off to the age of the Great Migration. Imagine. They still 
used ships, transmats and other <machines>. To journey 
from galaxy to galaxy. You spend too much time. 
Cooped up in this <place>. It’s not good for you.” 

The writer couldn’t think. Of a single exciting idea. 
In time travel. 

There was the ultimate possibilities of evolution .... 

The writer tried to concentrate. Tune out 
distractions. Any <entities> operating on the higher 
<mental bands> this is the <star> canopus. Seeking to 
join <minds> with those interested in <interlocking> 
metalogics. Please contact me <81 8-000-0000>. 

Here, too, the author drew a blank. 

There was humekind’s origin . prehistory .... 

At last. The writer had an idea. Began to 
<compose>: The first star ship. Arced out. From Earth. 
Carrying the mind of humekind. All aboard knew it was 
a voyage that could determine the future of the race. Set 
it free from confinement on a single planet. And allow it 
to claim its heritage: the stars. 

The writer’s <progeny> arrived. “What do you think 
about this?” the writer asked. 

“;Not that hoary old cliche <prog>. It was disproved 
long ago. <Everyone> knows. Humes evolved between 
the stars. Crafted ships. To reach planets.” <Laughed.> 

The writer <expunged> that <record>. 

There had once been a time. Of unlimited 
imagination. Of boundless potential. When new dreams. 
A million possible futures. A thousand maybe worlds. 
Were minted everyday. 

^How had science fiction writers. Don’t it. 
Envisioned. All those exciting. Potential futures? Seen 
something different. For the humerace. To do. Be. 
Experience. 

The writer <mocked up> a body. Extruded. A limb. 
Scratched <head>. There were times. When it was so 
much. More satisfying. To be physical. 

Then dissolved. Body. <Room>. <Simulator>. Back 
into Primordial elements. From which had so recently. 
Created them. 

Maybe it was time. To visit. That universe they had 
discovered. Where the laws of physics. Were said to be. 
Even stranger. Than those of the last. Dozen or so. 
Perhaps that. Would help <spark>. A new idea. 

—JEAN MARIE STINE 



Qiisxy 

SUBSCRIBE NOW - 1-800-869-0658 




MY LIFE AMONG THE STARS 



81 




MY LIFE AMONG 
THE STARS 



By BJO TRIMBLE 

Illustrated by Courtney 

Balance of Terror (Title refers to an Eisenhower 
speech on the cold war, where he refers to keeping peace 
with a “balance of terror”) German: “Spock unter 
Verdacht” (Spock Under Suspicion) Japanese: 
“Uchuukichi SOS” (S.O.S. From a Starbase) Portuguese: 
“Medida de Terror”; “O equilibrio do Terror” 

Writer: PAUL SCHNEIDER 
Director: VINCE McEVEETY 
Assistant Director: GREGG PETERS 
Producer: GENE RODDENBERRY 
Music Score: FRED STEINER 
Location: Enterprise, Desilu 9 
Aired: 12/15/66 

CTtARDATE: 1709.2 — Kirk is to officiate at the 
wedding of Enterprise crewmen Angela Martine 
and Robert Tomlinson when he is interrupted by a 
distress call. 

Romulans have launched an unprovoked attack on 
Federation outposts, guardians of the neutral zone 
between Federation and Romulan territory. Until this 
encounter, the Federation has never met the Romulans 
face to face, and humans have no idea what the aliens 
look like. The Romulans have an invisibility screen or 
cloak and a new weapon, photon torpedoes. 

The attackers head for home, with the USS 
Enterprise in pursuit. The invisibility cloak makes it 



impossible to detect anything outside the ship, so the 
Romulans cannot tell if the “blip” following them is an 
enemy ship or a harmless echo. The Enterprise picks up 
a picture of the Romulans’ bridge and learns that the 
Romulans are of Vulcan descent, with the same pointed 
ears. This makes Lieutenant Stiles — whose forebears 
fought and died in the Romulan War — suspicious of 
Spock. The Romulan commander, a man of great 
character, attempts to shake off the Enterprise but is 
forced to turn and fight, though his ship is low on fuel. 

The Enterprise loses most of its phaser power when a 
leak in the Enterprise’s phaser coolant system poisons 
the air, disabling Tomlinson and Stiles. Spock fires the 
phaser manually and risks phaser coolant poisoning to 
rescue the two men. Tomlinson dies, but Stiles survives, 
and overcomes his bigotry. The Romulan ship is 
disabled, and its commander, rather than submit to 
capture, salutes Kirk as an honored enemy and destroys 
his own ship. The moral is about bigotry and honor. 

CAST: 

Kirk: WILLIAM SHATNER 

Spock: LEONARD NIMOY 

McCoy: DeFOREST KELLEY 

Scott: JAMES DOOHAN 

Sulu: GEORGE TAKEI 

Uhura: NICHELLE NICHOLS 

Yeoman Rand: GRACE LEE WHITNEY 

Lieutenant Andrew Stiles: PAUL COMI 

Specialist Robert Tomlinson: STEPHEN MINES 

Specialist 2/C Angela Martine: BARBARA BALDAVIN 

Commander Hansen: GARRY WALBERG 

Crewman Fields: JOHN ARNDT 

Romulan Commander: MARK LENARD 

Decius: LAWRENCE MONTAIGNE 

The Centurion: JOHN WARBURTON 

Romulan Scanner Operator: ROBERT CHADWICK 

Romulan Crewman: WALTER DAVIS 

Romulan Crewman: VINCE DEADRICK 

NOTES: 

This episode is a futuristic “Enemy Below” or 
“Silent Running” submarine story. 

Captain Kirk shows self-doubt, asking “Why me?” 
when he must make a command decision that could start 
a galactic war. McCoy comforts Kirk with “there is only 
one of each of us” and each of us is needed. 

Kirk knows football — he refers to making an 
“end-run” around the Romulans. 

Spock is more excitable than in later episodes — he 
is still being shaped as that “interesting alien” on the 
bridge. Spock raises both eyebrows and almost smiles 
when he sees Romulans — he is not surprised to see 
Vulcanoid aliens; Romulan ancestors left Vulcan long 
before the Age of Logic. 

Spock has a book with him in the briefing room. But 
he doesn’t need a book when Kirk asks him about types 
of comets — he knows his astronomy by heart. 



82 



GALAXY 



Spock comes close to a genuine reaction to Stiles’ 
bigotry. Kirk tells Stiles to leave his bigotry in his 
quarters. 

This was Mark Lenard’s first Hollywood job — he’d 
been an actor and opera “spear carrier” in New York. He 
was one of the actors suggested for the role of Spock; 
ironically, he played Spock’s father and had to be “aged” 
for the part. 

Angela’s wedding dress was standard USS 
Enterprise gold uniform and white feathers in her hair. 

Actress Barbara Baldavin played four roles on the 
Enterprise: Angela Martine in this episode, Lt. Teller in 
“Shore Leave,” Lisa in “Turnabout Intruder,” and 
Angela Baker in “Space Seed.” There was never any 
indication if Angela Martine became Angela Baker 
through marriage between episodes, or if the writers just 
liked the name Angela. 

The term “Starbase” had not yet been invented by 
Star Trek writers, so Kirk refers to “Command Base.” 

Sulu “respectfully recommends” security alert be 
maintained. He has far more knowledge of the starship 
than he lets on. He seems pleased to have Uhura at the 
navigation helm. 

Yeoman Janine Rand seems rather young and naive 
in this episode. She asks Kirk if she should continue log 
entries. Of course she should; that’s what yeomen are 
for. 

NBC was firmly against showing females in 
responsible space jobs. Angela was little more than 
secretary/clerk for the weapons section of the Enterprise. 
Uhura was at one point the only officer on the bridge, but 
NBC said no to a black woman in charge of a starship! 

Kirk refers to the Romulan Commander as “Captain” 
— a formal address only, as the human could not 
possibly know Romulan ranks. 

The Earth-Romulan war was 100 years before 
Stardate 1709.2, but the Federation and warp-driven 
starships are only 40 years old on this date. The war may 
have been between Romulans and an alliance of Earth 
colonies that predated the Federation. 

The Romulan Commander, who was never named, 
has an artistic soul: “Behold, a marvel in the darkness,” 
he said of the comet Icarus. He comments dryly that 
“danger and I are old companions” and bitterly that these 
attacks will lead to “our gift to the homeland — another 
war.” He tells Kirk “you and I are of a kind. In a 
different reality I could have called you friend,” just 
before the Romulan Commander destroys his own ship 
and everyone on board. 

The Romulans know of some sort of sorcery: “He’s a 
sorcerer, that one” says the Romulan Commander about 
Captain Kirk’s maneuvers to capture the Romulan ship. 

The debris jettisoned from the Romulan ship was 
plasti-forms, metal molds, conduits — all junk from the 
prop department. 

Bridge lights go out when they fire phasers aboard 
the Enterprise — this did not continue in subsequent 
episodes. 



The Romulan ship was called “Bird of Prey” by Lt. 
Stiles, who may have heard the name from his parents. 
This is the first indication we have of the name of the 
alien ship. 

Though the Romulans only have impulse engines, 
they manage to easily outrun the warp-driven Enterprise, 
and Romulan photon torpedoes move at warp speeds. 

How does Spock manage to get a visual signal from 
the Romulan ship’s bridge when there is no way there 
could be a Federation viewer/recorder aboard the alien 
ship? 

Sulu says “speed is at maximum” — maximum 
what? 

The Enterprise lay silent for over 9 hours and 47 
minutes, then Spock accidentally made a noise that 
annoyed the suspicious Stiles. But Kirk saw it as a 
chance to flush out the Romulans from hiding. 

Spock says “bearing 111, mark 14” but he already 
said that was his course, not bearing. 

Last line: a grief-stricken Angela telling Captain 
Kirk, “I’m all right.” Last scene: Kirk striding down the 
Enterprise corridor. 



— BJO TRIMBLE 




Subscribe to Bjo Trimble's own SF Newsletter 

"The Newsletter for TV & Movie SF, Fantasy & Horror Fans!" 

P. O. Box 6858, Kingwood, TX 77325-6858 



Send $2.00 for sample issue 







FOR YOUR INFORMATION 



83 




FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION 

By CLAUDE NEEDHAM, Ph.D. 

Illustrated by Freas 

I don’t know; it might not bother you, but every 
now and then I get a little weirded out by the 
shear mass of history. We like to think of 
ourselves and our planet as being new. “Oh, look dear. 
It’s the sunrise. A new day is on its way.” In case you 
weren’t aware of it, the sun doesn’t rise. No more than 
it’s true that W.C. Fields would actually thrust his nose 
firmly between his opponent’s teeth and pull him to the 
floor on top of him. “Yes, officer, I admit it. I repeatedly 
slammed my face and body into the assailant’s fists and 
feet.” 

The sun is the equivalent of a solar couch-potato. It 
sits at the center of the solar system while a bunch of 
planets, asteroids and a few comets revolve and rotate — 
apparently industrious. We’ll leave the question of true 
industry to the philosophers. Not because they are 
equipped to handle it — but because it drives them crazy 
and I do so love watching them scuttle around like 
Kafkaesque cockroaches trying to extract the apple of an 
idea from their backsides. 

To be fair to the sun, it’s not always such a 
stay-at-home lazy-do-nothing. Quite the contrary. In its 
capacity as a star, the sun is very much the mover and 
groover. Maybe when viewed from the proper frame of 
reference your household couch-potato isn’t such a lazy 
bum after all. Let’s face it, guys. If you provide warmth 
so a bunch of hairless apes don’t freeze their bare little 
butts off and provide enough rays to grow food for their 



hairless not-so-little bellies, you get better press. 

So what does this have to do with the apparency of 
newness that gets ascribed to each day? You got me 
there. From a physical point of view we’re looking at a 
rather large ball of molten stuff (magma) with a thin 
crust of mostly cooled scum (terra firma) floating on the 
surface of said ball spinning like a top while it makes a 
yearly revolution in a near-vacuum at near zero absolute 
(4°K) around the sun. 

In case you were wondering how we know that it 
takes the Earth a year to revolve around the sun, some 
long-dead guy that was an amateur in his day is now 
called a Scientist defined it that way. 

A year is the time it takes for the Earth to go once 
around the sun and a day is the time it takes for the Earth 
to spin once on the dial. Hopefully, the music of the 
spheres doesn’t go the way of FM. 

Are you old enough to remember when FM was 
experimental music and mostly non-commercial? At one 
point it was a social crime to listen to FM and you could 
be rat-packed if they (the not-so-hairless descendants of 
killer apes) caught you reading science fiction. I don’t 
know if nature abhors it, but people sure have a hard 
time handling anything new or different. 

So what does all of this have to do with my being 
weirded out by the shear pressure of history? I spent a 
lot of time studying water in graduate school. For a few 
years I was on the forefront of research into the 
physical-chemical properties of water. Then I dropped 
out of the race and fell back into the spectator stands of 
Science magazine and Scientific American. 

Water is one of the major wonders of science, and 
very understudied — and I don’t mean there are lots of 
aspiring actresses hoping it breaks a leg just before 
opening night. We are talking not - enough - good - 
scientists - directing - serious - attention - into - the - 




84 



GALAXY 



area. 

For the longest time it totally puzzled me why such a 
rich area of study as the physical-chemical properties of 
water went so neglected. I had a brief chat with Madame 
Pullman about just this point following her guest lecture. 
She had a similar lament about phosphate head rotations 
in cellular membranes. 

Then one Friday night during the qualitative 
sampling of various fermented hop-products the answer 
came to me. Actually, it was more during the process of 
returning said fermented products. You are aware, I 
assume, that you can’t buy beer? So while I was busy 
returning a rather large quantity of rented beer, it 
suddenly dawned on me that a dinosaur probably carried 
the very same water molecules that I had recently 
shuttled the fifty feet from table to bathroom. 

The little H 2 Os that I was so earnestly hoping would 
not splash back at me were probably veterans of 
thousands, hundreds of thousands, maybe even millions 
of round trip excursions into and out of a variety of 
dinosaur bladders. 

When I got back to the table, my lab partners were 
just beginning the sampling process of a new pitcher — 
for further qualitative analysis, one would assume. 
Biologists may be able to draw a graph based on a single 
point, but chemists (like us) needed lots of data points. 
Physicists, on the other hand, know all the formulas. 
Give them one data point and they can extrapolate the 
whole rest of the graph. 




After a brief, but enthusiastic exposition concerning 
my recent leap of understanding into the history of water 
molecules, my former friends looked at me as if I had 
just crawled out from under a rather scummy and 
unkempt rock. 

It was many months later that the full implication of 
my lab-mates’ responses became clear to me. No one 
wants to confront the fact that every glass of water that 
one drinks contains molecules of H 2 0 that have been 
through countless millions of kidneys and bladders. Oh, I 
can hear the scientific-realists now, saying ,“Yes, but the 
water molecules get cleaned-up by sand-filtration and the 
evaporative rain process.” Well, if that’s true, why can’t 
we all become virgins again by a good shower, white 
undies, and a midnight move to a new town? 

Nature is the ultimate recycler. Did you know that 
nature is still using the same formula for water that it has 
been using since . maybe even clear back to just a few 
days after the most recent big bang? Recent big bang? 
It’s a bitch, isn’t it? Even the big bang was made from 
previously used parts. 

We are not the first and we won’t be the last to use 
the atoms and molecules that make up the lump of 
hamburger called “me.” We are renters in every sense of 
the word. And don’t give me that “we like to buy so we 
can build equity. To whom are you going to sell , and 
where are you going to relocate if they buy? 

— CLAUDE NEEDHAM, Ph.D. 



Work Space Gallery 

P.O. Box 1 26 
New Paltz, NY 12561 
(914) 255-2088 

MACRODIMENSIONAL MATH MG 
PHANTASMAGORIC PH RAMI MG 
PHQR YOUR SCI-FI ARTWORK 

Gala.3Ela.zi Sorigraphs 
Cosmoidlo Ceramics 

and special 

"weeMieeit: ycabs 

as Alien iiAneesT" 

T-Shirts 




ADVERTISEMENT 



85 




Skulking Permit 

by Robert Sheckley 



Skulking Permit was published in a deluxe 
edition of 15 copies with original serigraph 
frontispiece by EJ. Gold, and many other 
original illustrations. In addition, 5 serigraphs 
in a portfolio accompany this edition. 

Leather binding with marble end papers. 

Published by 

Heidelberg Editions International. $500 



86 



Drawings for the Bible 4 Illustrations for the Bible 

(>\f /K axe 



GALAX'S 



Verve #33-34 and Verve #37-38. Two volumes. Folio, 
original boards. Paris, Editions de la Revue Verve, 1956, 1960. 




Fine and nicely 
matched copies of 
the First and only 
issue of Chagall's 
illustrations for 
this Bible which 
documents and 
complements the 
edition of the Bible 
published by 
Teriade in 1956. 



These two volumes 
contain a total of 
40 original color 
lithographs. 
Complete sets in 
such condition are 
increasingly rare 
due to plundering . 



Two volumes 
encased in a highly 
unusual leather 
felt-lined folding 
box, handpainted 
by boxmaster, 
Stephanie Boyd. 
$ 14,500 





Rtfr/mnl i n ^ry and unique combination of publisher's and boxmaster « 



art; the one -of- a- kind box is signed by the artist. 



Witb embossed certificate. 







ADVANCE PUBLICATION INFORMATION 
Contact: Nancy Christie or Ivan Lourta 
(916)477-1116 



ISBN: 0-89556-096-4 

Prtca: $175.00 regular ad«on 

$225.00 wUh hon tort# aerigraph 
$125.00; $17S.00(ht) pre-puMcatton. 
IWUNDm: Dacambar. 1992 
EdMonSba: Edtton la Briefly HmHed to 125 oopias. 

Oakixe.aawn hard-covar Nm«sd adHion wUh aignad 
and nuntoared Iromiaplaca aarigraph bound In. 
handsomely gold-amboasad on cover and spina. 
Hon (axle: Hon texts aarigraph available 
only tor ooptea 1-25, may be sold out by 

subscription at time of publication 
(check with Gateways tor availability). 



JESUS CHRISTS 

A novel by A.J. Langguth, Illustrated by E.J. Gold 

‘Just as we had become accustomed to the fact that the only first-rate 
religious fiction today is being written by Norman Mailer, this mad novel 
comes along to surprise and enchant us. A comic religious novel? ... Impos- 
sible. but It has happened. It Is either one of the canniest rejections of the 
Christian enterprise In our time, or one of the subtlest expressions of admira- 
tion for Jesus. Or both. Or neither... 

—The New HeubMc 

Suppose that the historical Jesus and his disciples, as chronicled In the Gospels, are an archetype of divine 
revelation OK. that's not hard to accept, whether you're a Christian or belong to any other religion or even it 
you are Buddhist, agnostic or atheist. Now suppose that, since the New Testament immortalizes archetypal 
events, there Is in every other period ot history another Jesus with another set of disciples, much like the ar- 
chetype. How about, identical except for the differences In culture and historical context whether It be the 
French Revolution, the Roaring Twenties, or World War II in Europe. 

This Is the thesis of Jesus Christs (yes. It'd plural...), and If worked out In Its details. It Is a mind-boggling and 
attention-riveting Idea. This is exactly what Langguth haa done in his unique novel. Enough said— you have to 
read this book to believe it Jesus Christs Is also an archetypal example of a novel that Is too serious to suc- 
ceed. can t be a best-seller, disappears from circulation once out of print and somehow gets stolen or lost 
with almost 100% frequency, from Mbraries...An obvious case lor Sirius Science Fiction revival. Your read of 
this free form novel Is considerably enhanced by it s large-size page format and illustration with a new series 
of drawings by E.J. Gold, who has admired the book since it s first release in the heady atmosphere of the 
late '60's. What more can we say— Highly Recommended! 

AJ. Langguth has had a long and distinguished, not to mention highly diversified, career as a professional 
writer. He was bom in 1933 In Minneapolis, attended Harvard College, where he also worked for a year, and 
then served in the U.S. Army in 1957-58. He was Political Editor at the Valley Times. San Fernando Valley, 
from 1960-63, then went on to the New York Times to become Bureau Chief in Saigon during the eventful 
year 1965. He wrote as a freelancer and authored five books— beginning with Jesus Christo— between 1966 
and 1978. when he |oined the faculty of the Journalism School. University of Southern California, where he is 
currently teachina as a full Professor. 





JEM CHRISTS 

BY AJ. LANGGUTH 



The illustrations for this book have a 
common thread which reminds one of 
the subtlety of mood created by 
Langguth. Working with transparency 
and layering Gold's imagery evokes an 
otherworldly quality present in this 
classic tale. 

Gold's knowledge of science fiction and 
his complete ease in the graphic 
medium put him in a very rare position 
and enable him to act both as editor 
and illustrator of a very high quality 
small publisher of limited editions. 

-W. Umpgu’Ji ^ | j 




88 



GALAXY 



r - ______ 



Hieroglyphic Ori Appollinis Niliaci de 
scris notis et sculpturis libri duo, 
quibus accessit versio recens, per Jo. 
Mercer urn coninnata, et observationes 
non infrugiferae. 

Parisiis, J. Kerver 1551. 

Fine emblematic woodcuts, small 
octavo, sprinkled calf gt. (very rare). 
This is a fine, tall copy, inscribed on the 
flyleaf, "ex libris Joannes Gibsone, 
Glasguae, 1739". 

"Cette Edition, que se trouve 
difficilement, est omde de tr£s jolies 
gravures en bois— " Brunet 

Quaritch quotes two copies in his 
1883 catalog, listed then at five pounds 
each. This was when you could get 
someone shanghaied in London for a 
couple of shillings, and land was selling 
in Los Angeles for a nickle an acre. 

The illustrations in this volume are in 
the manner of the great pictorial 
emblems, not merely plain heiro- 
glyphics. The images are all clear and 
very clean, and you'll find them very 
appealing and intriguing. 

Encased in a rich leather felt-lined 
case, handpainted by Rymja in the style 
of the masters, signed by the artist, with 
an embossed certificate from H.E.I. 

Rymja's work is very highly prized, 
and she has hundreds of collectors of her 
classical paintings on leather. 

$4,500 



Maillol, Aristide. Virgile. Les Gdorgi- 

ques. 

Texte Latin et version franpaise de 
l'Abbe Jacques Delille, gravures sur bois 
d 1 Aristide Maillol. Paris, Philippe Gonin, 
1937-43 (1950). 2 vols. 4to. (2), 174, 
(2); (2), 154, (2) pp. including 122 
woodcuts, of which some are illustrated 
initial letters. 

Unsewn, as issued, in publisher's 
cream wrappers, preserved in quarter 
vellum slipcase and chemise. With the 
prospectus for the work, loosely inserted. 

One of a limited edition of 750 copies 
printed on rag-wove paper, watermarked 
with Maillol's "seated nude". 



Maillol began the first drawings for 
this project in 1908 when, returning 
from a trip to Greece with Count Harry 
Kessler of the Cranach Press, he stopped 
over at Naples and Pompeii. 

Over the next three decades, he added 
a few more cuts to the original work and 
in 1937 Gonin urged him to resume the 
project; the final block was delivered 
just before the artist died. 

Maillol's eyesight was poor during the 
last years of his life, so the actual cutting 
for the project was executed by 
craftsmen working from the artist's 
sketches made directly on the print 
surface of the wood block. 

See: Artist & Book p. 175 This copy 
is no. 472/750. 

Encased in an elaborate and 
completely unique leather felt-lined 
folding box, handpainted by E.J. Gold. 
Box is signed by the artist. With 
embossed certificate from H.E.I. 

$ 7,500 



Dubuffet, Cerceaux 'sorcellent, 

Max Loreau; Editions Beyeler a Bale et 
Jeanne Bucher a Paris. 

In publisher's wraps protected by 
french-wrapped glassine. Color lithos 
throughout are powerfully printed, lots 
of intaglio where the black lines dig into 
the paper. 

This is example #440 of a numbered 
edition of 750. There were 50 additional 
proofs which were hors commerce. 
Encased in a brilliantly innovative 
colorful one-of-a-kind leather, wood, 
stone and metal felt-cushioned folding 
box, handcrafted by boxmaster Claude 
Needham. Signed by the artist. With 
certificate from H.E.I. 

$4,500 



Ross, Frederick. The Ruined Abbeys 
of Britain. 

Illustrated with Coloured Plates and 
Wood Engravings from Drawings by 
A.F. Lydon. London: William 

MacKenzie, [1882], 



One volume in two bindings; original 
green leather-grained cloth, title stamped 
in gilt & figures with crest stamped in 
gold and colours, gilt edges, slightly 
worn at comers, but a remarkably good 
copy with the plates in fine condition. 

First edition, with very fine, delicate, 
and yet dramatic, color plates by 
Benjamin Fawcett of Driffield. As 
Friedman notes, " Fawcett was the only 
major English color printer of the 
nineteenth century to spend his entire 
career outside of London. 

"All of his splendid books were 
printed, colored, assembled and bounc 
in his workshop in Driffield, Yorkshire... 

"Fawcett's color printing ii 
characterized by the very fine quality q 
the line wood engraving... His ink tonet 
are so subtle and transparent that they 
have the appearance of watercolor. " 

Lydon was Fawcett’s apprentice anc 
he left the firm in 1883, after which little 
of note was printed there; this, one of his 
very last works with Fawcett, is < 
glorious swan-song. 

McLean writes that "the plates are 
certainly magnificent." 

Ref: Friedman, Color Printing it 
England, p. 34. 

McLean, VBD, p. 204 

The twelve color plates capture the 
eeriness of the moors and the ruins o 
medieval abbeys of old England. Ii 
addition, there are many fine wooe 
engravings in black-and-white 
throughout, and a fascinating text. 

Encased with medieval artifacts ane 
handblown glass vials containing soi 
taken from each of the major ancien 
sites of Britain. Each item i 
accompanied by a certificate o 
authenticity; certificates are looseboune 
in a separate chemise which fits into it 
own compartment in the folding 
felt-lined box designed by artist Dell 
Heywood. 

Contained within the botton 
compartment of the folding box is 
miniature, exquisitely detailed landscap 
in approximately 1/300 scale, featuring 
mined abbey. 

$35,00 



ADVERTISEMENT 



89 




A new Painting Series by E. J. Gold 
Modeled by Catherine Oxenberg 

Available from nei 

1-800-869-0658 • 916-432-1839 
P.O. BOX 370 NEVADA CITY CA 95959 

mri *». m i t , - . n i l 1 l 

U, " . ' " - ■ ' 

- - 



Catherine the Great 



90 



GALAXY 



f 






ADVERTISEMENT 



91 




THE LEGEND RETURNS 



GALAXY Magazine, piloted by Editor E. J. Gold, is published six 
times per year. Available at $2.50 for a single copy ($3.50 in Canada), 
GALAXY subscriptions are $18 for U.S. Bulk Rate, $22 for U.S. First Class, 
$28 for Canada, $30 for Great Britain/Europe, and $32 for the Pacific Rim. 

With your subscription, you get a Free Galaxian Button ($2 value) 
and a $10 Merchandise Certificate (not redeemable in cash) to use with 
your first order from the Official GALAXY Catalog. GALAXIAN Buttons 
are available separately for $2 each plus $1 shipping and handling. 

Your subscription will begin with the current issue. Subscribers will be 
given preference for back issue orders. 

A limited number of Volume I, Number 1 have been put aside as single 
issue samples @ $2. 50/copy plus $1 First Class shipping and handling. Offer 
good only while supplies last! 



Contact: 

GALAXY MAGAZINE 





92 



GALAXY 




Clowns on Mars - $39.95 




Simulacrum 2 1/2 - $89.95 




Gas Pump Ivy Government Employee 

$39.95 - $29.95 $59.95 




Hiker in Space - $39.95 



Ann Arbor - $149.95 





She Waits - $79.95 




Curb Your Dino - $89.95 




"PGL" Units. Each is a unique creation, a rendition of 
an on- or off-planet landscape. Tell us your shoe size* 
and we'll send you the right Pocket Galaxy Landscape 

$19.95 




* Actually shoe size has nothing to do 
with it. We'll send you the next PGL 
in line. It will be synchronistically 
attuned to you. 



ORDER FROM OUR CATALOG! 

IT'S EASY 

EASY: FILL OUT ORDER FORM AND MAIL IT TO US WITH 
YOUR CHECK. CALL FOR SHIPPING CHARGES. 

EASIER: FILL OUT ORDER FORM ON PAGE 90 & FAX IT TO US. 
EASIEST: ORDER BY PHONE - PAY WITH YOUR CREDIT CARD. 
ORDER LINE: 1-800-869-0658 / 916-432-1716 
FAX LINE: 916-432-1810 
MAILING ADDRESS: P.O. BOX 370 
NEVADA CITY. CA 95959 




ADVERTISEMENT 



93 






94 



GALAXY 



"INSTANT CLASSIC" is not an oxymoron, like 'Jumbo 

Shrimp'. It is the only way to describe these works from Galaxy 
Classics— limited edition, hand-crafted works of art, many signed by 
both author and artist, and available in strictly limited editions. The 
finest works by the grand masters of the field, in lavishly illustrated, 
hand-sewn books to treasure for a lifetime, and more. 



Galaxy 

CLASSICS 



A. SENSE OF WONDER 
SCIENCE FICTION 
Edited by Forrest J Ackerman 
Illustrated by E.J. Gold 

Forrest J Ackerman's collection of unforgettable sto- 
ries from the childhood of science fiction. 

SF 1410 $225 

SF1410SER w / hors texte $275 

B. E.J. GOLDS 
GUIDE TO THE GALAXY 

& BEYOND THE UNKNOWN 

VOLUMES 1-8 

Illustrated by E. J. Gold 

Classic stories portraying the archetypes of the 

genre. Expanded realities, time-travel, technological 

magic, intraspecies communication, alternate 

worlds, and a host of other mind-expanding themes. 

Volume LSFOOl $225 

Volume LSFOOISER w/ hors texte — $275 

C. SKULKING PERMIT 
by Robert Sheckley 
Illustrated by E.J. Gold 

A colony cut off from Earth's civilization is sudden- 
ly scheduled for a military inspection. A masterfully 
ironic and visionary tale. Edition of 15 only. 

SF004 — CALL! for availability & price. 

D. JESUS CHRISTS 
by A.J. Langguth 
Illustrated by E.J. Gold 

This amazing book — out of print for many years — 
tells of different Christs living in different times. 
"...this mad novel comes along to surprise and 
enchant us. A comic religious novel? Impossible, 
but it has happened. It is either one of the canniest 
rejections of the Christian enterprise in our time, or 
one of the subtlest expressions of admiration for 
Jesus ... ” 

The New Republic, 1965 
SF009 $225 




SF009SER w / hors texte $275 



"Besides bringing back forgotten classics, these art edtions are gor- 
geous works of art and also fine examples of the bookbinder's craft. 
This is your chance to get in on the start of another Arkham House!" 

Robert Sheckley 



SUBSCRIBE TO THE WHOLE EIGHT VOLUME SET OF GOLD'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY, 
AND EACH VOLUME IS YOURS FOR ONLY $175* 

COMING SOON: NEW WORK BY ROBERT SHECKLEY & JACQUELINE LICHTENBERG 
PLEASE CALL FOR MORE INFORMATION 

1 - 800 - 869-0658 ( 916 ) 432-1716 





ADVERTISEMENT 



95 





VISIONS 

in the 

Realm of Light 



Stained Glass Images 

From the Tibetan Thangka Tradition 

Original Light Studio 
Plus One • Minus One, Inc. 

P.O. Box 22693 
Santa Fe, New Mexico 98502 
(505) 982-3402 



White Tara Window by Jeanne Kristel 30" x 24" 
Designed by Dru Kristel 



What's (be difference between a" ordinary 

COW and a bovine guide? 



THE UNION LABEL 



$89.95 for 2-video set. 

Fr °m The Union Label. 
CALL 1-800-869-0658 or 916-432-1716 

PO Box 370 Nevada City CA 95946 



Don't ask your travel agent. 

1 1 Don't look in Grand McNally. 

There's no Grey Line Bus, 

W But there is a tour... it's 



USE OUR HANDY 
ORDERING FORM 
ON PAGE 90 



A WALKING TOUR OF BARDOTOWN 



A WALKING TOUR OF BARDOTOWN 



You're glad that you planned ahead, aren't you? 



Don't you wish everyone did? 



Full of the sights, sounds, and situations that we'll be 
facing on the Other Side... 



n O 2 

< Z< X 
&j co -y 
o. o i 
*» x CO 
n w m 
S? "J 3 



n 

> 

VO 



o 

> 

r 

► 

X 

-< 

s 

> 

n 

> 

N 

z 

w 



ANNOUNCING 

NEW WORK by 

JACQUELINE LICHTENBERG: 

— □ BOXMASTER □ — 



cn CO 

!-*• M* 

j— t. ( — i 



Ct 



3 

cr 

Oj 



> 

< 

IT) 



y 

i? 

Uj 




BDKITlFSTEfi 

bv JBCDUEUnE UCHlEilBERG 



Featuring Illustrations 
by 

Hannah M. G. Shapero 

Edition Maximum, 250 

• 

These are Collectible, 
Hand-Made Books! 



Hand-Bound Edition 



Gold Stamped Cover 

• 

Hand-pulled Serigraph 
Frontispiece 

• 

Signed by Author 
and Artist 

• 

French End papers 

• 

$225 

Pre-Publication: $175 

• 

Reserve your copy 
now! 

This one will go fast! 




For More Information 
on this and other 
Galaxy Classic Titles, 
Call 1-800-869-0658 
or 916-432-1716 
Galaxy Classics 
PO Box 370 
Nevada City CA 95959 



Published by Sirius Science Fiction 
Presented by Galaxy Classics 








galaxy 

CIASSICS