Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
[Illustration: Illustrated by FINLAY]
  the memory of mars
  By RAYMOND F. JONES
   _"As soon as I'm well we'll go to Mars for a vacation
   again," Alice would say. But now she was dead, and the
   surgeons said she was not even human. In his misery,
   Hastings knew two things: he loved his wife; but they
   had never been off Earth!_
A reporter should be objective even about a hospital. It's his business
to stir others' emotions and not let his own be stirred. But that was no
good, Mel Hastings told himself. No good at all when it was Alice who
was here somewhere, balanced uncertainly between life and death.
Alice had been in Surgery far too long. Something had gone wrong. He was
sure of it. He glanced at his watch. It would soon be dawn outside. To
Mel Hastings this marked a significant and irrevocable passage of time.
If Alice were to emerge safe and whole from the white cavern of Surgery
she would have done so now.
Mel sank deeper in the heavy chair, feeling a quietness within himself
as if the slow creep of death were touching him also. There was a sudden
far distant roar and through the window he saw a streak of brightness in
the sky. That would be the tourist ship, the Martian Princess, he
remembered.
That was the last thing Alice had said before they took her away from
him. "As soon as I'm well again we'll go to Mars for a vacation again,
and then you'll remember. It's so beautiful there. We had so much fun--"
Funny, wonderful little Alice--and her strange delusion that she still
clung to, that they had taken a Martian vacation in the first year of
their marriage. It had started about a year ago, and nothing he could
say would shake it. Neither of them had ever been to space.
He wished now he had taken her. It would have been worth it, no matter
what its personal cost. He had never told her about the phobia that had
plagued him all his life, the fear of outer space that made him break
out in a cold sweat just to think of it--nor of the nightmare that came
again and again, ever since he was a little boy.
There must have been some way to lick this thing--to give her that
vacation on Mars that she had wanted so much.
Now it was too late. He knew it was too late.
  *  *  *  *  *
The white doors opened, and Dr. Winters emerged slowly. He looked at Mel
Hastings a long time as if trying to remember who the reporter was. "I
must see you--in my office," he said finally.
Mel stared back in numb recognition. "She's dead," he said.
Dr. Winters nodded slowly as if in surprise and wonder that Mel had
divined this fact. "I must see you in my office," he repeated.
Mel watched his retreating figure. There seemed no point in following.
Dr. Winters had said all that need be said. Far down the corridor the
Doctor turned and stood patiently as if understanding why Mel had not
followed, but determined to wait until he did. The reporter stirred and
rose from the chair, his legs withering beneath him. The figure of Dr.
Winters grew larger as he approached. The morning clatter of the
hospital seemed an ear-torturing shrillness. The door of the office
closed and shut it out.
"She is dead." Dr. Winters sat behind the desk and folded and unfolded
his hands. He did not look at Mel. "We did everything we could, Mr.
Hastings. Her injuries from the accident were comparatively minor--" He
hesitated, then went on. "In normal circumstances there would have been
no question--her injuries could have been repaired."
"What do you mean, 'In normal circumstances--'?"
Dr. Winters turned his face away from Mel for a moment as if to avoid
some pain beyond endurance. He passed a weary hand across his forehead
and eyes and held it there a moment before speaking. Then he faced Mel
again. "The woman you brought in here last night--your wife--is
completely un-normal in her internal structure. Her internal organs
cannot even be identified. She is like a being of some other species.
She is not--she is simply not human, Mr. Hastings."
Mel stared at him, trying to grasp the meaning of the words. Meaning
would not come. He uttered a short, hysterical laugh that was like a
bark. "You're crazy, Doc. You've completely flipped your lid!"
Dr. Winters nodded. "For hours during the night I was in agreement with
that opinion. When I first observed your wife's condition I was
convinced I was utterly insane. I called in six other men to verify my
observation. All of them were as stupefied as I by what we saw. Organs
that had no place in a human structure. Evidence of a chemistry that
existed in no living being we had ever seen before--"
The Doctor's words rolled over him like a roaring surf, burying,
smothering, destroying--
"I want to see." Mel's voice was like a hollow cough from far away. "I
think you're crazy. I think you're hiding some mistake you made
yourself. You killed Alice in a simple little operation, and now you're
trying to get out of it with some crazy story that nobody on earth would
ever believe!"
"I want you to see," said Dr. Winters, rising slowly. "That's why I
called you in here, Mr. Hastings."
  *  *  *  *  *
Mel trailed him down the long corridor again. No words were spoken
between them. Mel felt as if nothing were real anymore.
They went through the white doors of Surgery and through the inner
doors. Then they entered a white, silent--cold--room beyond.
In the glare of icy white lights a single sheeted figure rested on a
table. Mel suddenly didn't want to see. But Dr. Winters was drawing back
the cover. He exposed the face, the beloved features of Alice Hastings.
Mel cried out her name and moved toward the table. There was nothing in
her face to suggest she was not simply sleeping, her hair disarrayed,
her face composed and relaxed as he had seen her hundreds of times.
"Can you stand to witness this?" asked Dr. Winters anxiously. "Shall I
get you a sedative?"
Mel shook his head numbly. "No--show me ..."
The great, fresh wound extended diagonally across the abdomen and
branched up beneath the heart. The Doctor grasped a pair of small
scissors and swiftly clipped the temporary sutures. With forceps and
retractors he spread open the massive incision.
Mel closed his eyes against the sickness that seized him.
"Gangrene!" he said. "She's full of gangrene!"
Below the skin, the surface layers of fatty tissue, the substance of the
tissue changed from the dark red of the wounded tissue to a dark and
greenish hue that spoke of deadly decay.
But Dr. Winters was shaking his head. "No. It's not gangrene. That's the
way we found the tissue. That appears to be its--normal condition, if
you will."
Mel stared without believing, without comprehending.
Dr. Winters probed the wound open further. "We should see the stomach
here," he said. "What is here where the stomach should be I cannot tell
you. There is no name for this organ. The intestinal tract should lie
here. Instead, there is only this homogeneous mass of greenish,
gelatinous material. Other organs, hardly differentiated from this mass,
appear where the liver, the pancreas, the spleen should be."
Mel was hearing his voice as if from some far distance or in a dream.
"There are lungs--of a sort," the Doctor went on. "She was certainly
capable of breathing. And there's a greatly modified circulatory system,
two of them, it appears. One circulates a blood substance in the outer
layers of tissue that is almost normal. The other circulates a liquid
that gives the remainder of the organs their greenish hue. But how
circulation takes place we do not know. She has no heart."
  *  *  *  *  *
Mel Hastings burst out in hysterical laughter. "Now I know you're crazy
Doc! My tender, loving Alice with no heart! She used to tell me, 'I
haven't got any brains. I wouldn't have married a dumb reporter if I
did. But so I've got a heart and that's what fell in love with you--my
heart, not my brains.' She loved me, can't you understand that?"
Dr. Winters was slowly drawing him away. "I understand. Of course I
understand. Come with me now, Mr. Hastings, and lie down for a little
while. I'll get you something to help take away the shock."
Mel permitted himself to be led away to a small room nearby. He drank
the liquid the Doctor brought, but he refused to lie down.
"You've shown me," he said with dull finality. "But I don't care what
the explanation is. I knew Alice. She was human all right, more so than
either you or I. She was completely normal, I tell you--all except for
this idea she had the last year or so that we'd gone together on a
vacation to Mars at one time."
"That wasn't true?"
"No. Neither of us had ever been out in space."
"How well did you know your wife before you married her?"
Mel smiled in faint reminiscence. "We grew up together, went to the same
grade school and high school. It seems like there was never a time when
Alice and I didn't know each other. Our folks lived next door for
years."
"Was she a member of a large family?"
"She had an older brother and sister and two younger sisters."
"What were her parents like?"
"They're still living. Her father runs an implement store. It's a farm
community where they live. Wonderful people. Alice was just like them."
Dr. Winters was silent before he went on. "I have subjected you to this
mental torture for just one reason, Mr. Hastings. If it has been a
matter of any less importance I would not have told you the details of
your wife's condition, much less asking you to look at her. But this is
such an enormous scientific mystery that I must ask your cooperation in
helping to solve it. I want your permission to preserve and dissect the
body of your wife for the cause of science."
Mel looked at the Doctor in sudden sharp antagonism. "Not even give her
a burial? Let her be put away in bottles, like--like a--"
"Please don't upset yourself any more than necessary. But I do beg that
you consider what I've just proposed. Surely a moment's reflection will
show you that this is no more barbaric than our other customs regarding
our dead.
"But even this is beside the point. The girl, Alice, whom you married is
like a normal human being in every apparent external respect, yet the
organs which gave her life and enabled her to function are like nothing
encountered before in human experience. It is imperative that we
understand the meaning of this. It is yours to say whether or not we
shall have this opportunity."
Mel started to speak again, but the words wouldn't come out.
"Time is critical," said Dr. Winters, "but I don't want to force you to
an instantaneous answer. Take thirty minutes to think about it. Within
that time, additional means of preservation must be taken. I regret that
I must be in such haste, but I urge that your answer be yes."
Dr. Winters moved towards the door, but Mel gestured for him to remain.
"I want to see her again," Mel said.
"There is no need. You have been tortured enough. Remember your wife as
you have known her all her life, not as you saw her a moment ago."
"If you want my answer let me see her again."
  *  *  *
Dr. Winters led the way silently back to the cold room. Mel drew down
the cover only far enough to expose the face of Alice. There was no
mistake. Somehow he had been hoping that all this would turn out to be
some monstrous error. But there was no error.
Would she want me to do what the Doctor has asked? he thought. She
wouldn't care. She would probably think it a very huge joke that she had
been born with innards that made her different from everybody else. She
would be amused by the profound probings and mutterings of the learned
doctors trying to find an explanation for something that had no
explanation.
Mel drew the sheet tenderly over her face.
"You can do as you wish," he said to Dr. Winters. "It makes no
difference to us--to either of us."
  *  *  *  *  *
The sedative Dr. Winters had given him, plus his own exhaustion, drove
Mel to sleep for a few hours during the afternoon, but by evening he was
awake again and knew that a night of sleeplessness lay ahead of him. He
couldn't stand to spend it in the house, with all its fresh reminders of
Alice.
He walked out into the street as it began to get dark. Walking was easy;
almost no one did it any more. The rush of private and commercial cars
swarmed overhead and rumbled in the ground beneath. He was an isolated
anachronism walking silently at the edge of the great city.
He was sick of it. He would have liked to have turned his back on the
city and left it forever. Alice had felt the same. But there was nowhere
to go. News reporting was the only thing he knew, and news occurred
only in the great, ugly cities of the world. The farmlands, such as he
and Alice had known when they were young, produced nothing of interest
to the satiated denizens of the towns and cities. Nothing except food,
and much of this was now being produced by great factories that
synthesized protein and carbohydrates. When fats could be synthesized
the day of the farmer would be over.
He wondered if there weren't some way out of it now. With Alice gone
there was only himself, and his needs were few. He didn't know, but
suddenly he wanted very much to see it all again. And, besides, he had
to tell her folks.
  *  *  *  *  *
The ancient surface bus reached Central Valley at noon the next day. It
all looked very much as it had the last time Mel had seen it and it
looked very good indeed. The vast, open lands; the immense ripe fields.
The bus passed the high school where Mel and Alice had attended classes
together. He half expected to see her running across the campus lawn to
meet him. In the middle of town he got off the bus and there were
Alice's mother and father.
They were dry-eyed now but white and numb with shock. George Dalby took
his hand and pumped it heavily. "We can't realize it, Mel. We just
can't believe Alice is gone."
His wife put her arms around Mel and struggled with her tears again.
"You didn't say anything about the funeral. When will it be?"
Mel swallowed hard, fighting the one lie he had to tell. He almost
wondered now why he had agreed to Dr. Winters' request. "Alice--always
wanted to do all the good she could in the world," he said. "She figured
that she could be of some use even after she was gone. So she made an
agreement with the research hospital that they could have her body after
she died."
It took a moment for her mother to grasp the meaning. Then she cried
out, "We can't even bury her?"
"We should have a memorial service, right here at home where all her
friends are," said Mel.
George Dalby nodded in his grief. "That was just like Alice," he said.
"Always wanting to do something for somebody else--"
And it was true, Mel thought. If Alice had supposed she was not going to
live any longer she would probably have thought of the idea, herself.
Her parents were easily reconciled.
They took him out to the old familiar house and gave him the room where
he and Alice had spent the first days of their marriage.
  *  *  *  *  *
When it was night and the lights were out he felt able to sleep
naturally for the first time since Alice's accident. She seemed not far
away here in this old familiar house.
In memory, she was not, for Mel was convinced he could remember the
details of his every association with her. He first became conscious of
her existence one day when they were in the third grade. At the
beginning of each school year the younger pupils went through a course
of weighing, inspection, knee tapping, and cavity counting. Mel had come
in late for his examination that year and barged into the wrong room. A
shower of little-girl squeals had greeted him as the teacher told him
kindly where the boy's examination room was.
But he remembered most vividly Alice Dalby standing in the middle of the
room, her blouse off but held protectingly in front of her as she jumped
up and down in rage and pointed a finger at him. "You get out of here,
Melvin Hastings! You're not a nice boy at all!"
Face red, he had hastily retreated as the teacher assured Alice and the
rest of the girls that he had made a simple mistake. But how angry Alice
had been! It was a week before she would speak to him.
He smiled and sank back deeply into the pillow. He remembered how proud
he had been when old Doc Collins, who came out to do the honors every
Fall, had told him there wasn't a thing wrong with him and that if he
continued to drink his milk regularly he'd grow up to be a football
player. He could still hear Doc's words whistling through his teeth and
feel the coldness of the stethoscope on his chest.
Suddenly, he sat upright in bed in the darkness.
Stethoscope!
They had tapped and inspected and listened to Alice that day, and all
the other examination days.
If Doc Collins had been unable to find a heartbeat in her he'd have
fainted--and spread the news all over town!
Mel got up and stood at the window, his heart pounding. Old Doc Collins
was gone, but the medical records of those school examinations might
still be around somewhere. He didn't know what he expected to prove, but
surely those records would not tell the same story Dr. Winters had told.
It took him nearly all the next day. The grade school principal agreed
to help him check through the dusty attic of the school, where ancient
records and papers were tumbled about and burst from their cardboard
boxes.
Then Paul Ames, the school board secretary, took Mel down to the
District Office and offered to help look for the records. The old
building was stifling hot and dusty with summer disuse. But down in the
cool, cobwebbed basement they found it.... Alice's records from the
third grade on up through the ninth. On every one: heart, o.k.; lungs,
normal. Pulse and blood pressure readings were on each chart.
"I'd like to take these," said Mel. "Her doctor in town--he wants to
write some kind of paper on her case and would like all the past medical
history he can get."
Paul Ames frowned thoughtfully. "I'm not allowed to give District
property away. But they should have been thrown out a long time
ago--take 'em and don't tell anybody I let you have 'em."
"Thanks. Thanks a lot," Mel said.
And when she was fourteen or fifteen her appendix had been removed. A
Dr. Brown had performed the operation, Mel remembered. He had taken over
from Collins.
"Sure, he's still here," Paul Ames said. "Same office old Doc Collins
used. You'll probably find him there right now."
Dr. Brown remembered. He didn't remember the details of the
appendectomy, but he still had records that showed a completely normal
operation.
"I wonder if I could get a copy of that record and have you sign it,"
Mel said. He explained about the interest of Dr. Winters in her case
without revealing the actual circumstances.
"Glad to," said Dr. Brown. "I just wish things hadn't turned out the way
they have. One of the loveliest girls that ever grew up here, Alice."
  *  *  *
The special memorial service was held in the old community church on
Sunday afternoon. It was like the drawing of a curtain across a portion
of Mel's life, and he knew that curtain would never open again.
He took a bus leaving town soon after the service.
There was one final bit of evidence, and he wondered all the way back to
town why he had not thought of it first. Alice's pregnancy had ended in
miscarriage, and there had never been another.
But X-rays had been taken to try to find the cause of Alice's
difficulty. If they showed that Alice was normal within the past two
years--
  *  *  *  *  *
Dr. Winters was mildly surprised to see Mel again. He invited the
reporter in to his office and offered him a chair. "I suppose you have
come to inquire about our findings regarding your wife."
"Yes--if you've found anything," said Mel. "I've got a couple of things
to show you."
"We've found little more than we knew the night of her death. We have
completed the dissection of the body. A minute analysis of each organ is
now under way, and chemical tests of the body's substances are being
made. We found that differences in the skeletal structure were almost as
great as those in the fleshy tissues. We find no relationship between
these structures and those of any other species--human or animal--that
we have ever found."
"And yet Alice was not always like that," said Mel.
Dr. Winters looked at him sharply. "How do you know that?"
Mel extended the medical records he had obtained in Central Valley. Dr.
Winters picked them up and examined them for a long time while Mel
watched silently.
Finally, Dr. Winters put the records down with a sigh. "This seems to
make the problem even more complex than it was."
"There are X-rays, too," said Mel. "Alice had pelvic X-rays only a
little over two years ago. I tried to get them, but the doctor said
you'd have to request them. They should be absolute proof that Alice was
different then."
"Tell me who has them and I'll send for them at once."
An hour later Dr. Winters shook his head in disbelief as he turned off
the light box and removed the X-ray photograph. "It's impossible to
believe that these were taken of your wife, but they corroborate the
evidence of the other medical records. They show a perfectly normal
structure."
The two men remained silent across the desk, each reluctant to express
his confused thoughts. Dr. Winters finally broke the silence. "It must
be, Mr. Hastings," he said, "--it must be that this woman--this utterly
alien person--is simply not your wife, Alice. Somehow, somewhere, there
must be a mistake in identity, a substitution of similar individuals."
"She was not out of my sight," said Mel. "Everything was completely
normal when I came home that night. Nothing was out of place. We went
out to a show. Then, on the way home, the accident occurred. There could
have been no substitution--except right here in the hospital. But I know
it was Alice I saw. That's why I made you let me see her again--to make
sure."
"But the evidence you have brought me proves otherwise. These medical
records, these X-rays prove that the girl, Alice, whom you married, was
quite normal. It is utterly impossible that she could have metamorphosed
into the person on whom we operated."
Mel stared at the reflection of the sky in the polished desk top. "I
don't know the answer," he said. "It must not be Alice. But if that's
the case, where is Alice?"
"That might even be a matter for the police," said Dr. Winters. "There
are many things yet to be learned about this mystery."
"There's one thing more," said Mel. "Fingerprints. When we first came
here Alice got a job where she had to have her fingerprints taken."
"Excellent!" Dr. Winters exclaimed. "That should give us our final
proof!"
It took the rest of the afternoon to get the fingerprint record and make
a comparison. Dr. Winters called Mel at home to give him the report.
There was no question. The fingerprints were identical. The corpse was
that of Alice Hastings.
  *  *  *  *  *
The nightmare came again that night. Worse than Mel could ever remember
it. As always, it was a dream of space, black empty space, and he was
floating alone in the immense depths of it. There was no direction. He
was caught in a whirlpool of vertigo from which he reached out with
agonized yearning for some solidarity to cling to.
There was only space.
After a time he was no longer alone. He could not see them, but he knew
they were out there. The searchers. He did not know why he had to flee
or why they sought him, but he knew they must never overtake him, or all
would be lost.
[Illustration]
Somehow he found a way to propel himself through empty space. The
searchers were growing points of light in the far distance. They gave
him a sense of direction. His being, his existence, his universe of
meaning and understanding depended on the success of his flight from the
searchers. Faster, through the wild black depths of space--
He never knew whether he escaped or not. Always he awoke in a tangle of
bedclothes, bathed in sweat, whimpering in fear. For a long time Alice
had been there to touch his hand when he awoke. But Alice was gone now
and he was so weary of the night pursuit. Sometimes he wished it would
end with the searchers--whoever they were--catching up with him and
doing what they intended to do. Then maybe there would be no more
nightmare. Maybe there would be no more Mel Hastings, he thought. And
that wouldn't be so bad, either.
He tossed sleeplessly the rest of the night and got up at dawn feeling
as if he had not been to bed at all. He would take one day more, and
then get back to the News Bureau. He'd take this day to do what couldn't
be put off any longer--the collecting and disposition of Alice's
personal belongings.
  *  *  *  *  *
He shaved, bathed and dressed, then began emptying the drawers, one by
one. There were many souvenirs, mementos. She was always collecting
these. Her bottom drawer was full of stuff that he'd glimpsed only
occasionally.
In the second layer of junk in the drawer he came across the brochure on
Martian vacations. It must have been one of the dreams of her life, he
thought. She'd wanted it so much that she'd almost come to believe that
it was real. He turned the pages of the smooth, glossy brochure. Its
cover bore the picture of the great Martian Princess and the blazoned
emblem of Connemorra Space Lines. Inside were glistening photos of the
plush interior of the great vacation liner, and pictures of the domed
cities of Mars where Earthmen played more than they worked. Mars had
become the great resort center of Earth.
Mel closed the book and glanced again at the Connemorra name. Only one
man had ever amassed the resources necessary to operate a private space
line. Jim Connemorra had done it; no one knew quite how. But he operated
now out of both hemispheres with a space line that ignored freight and
dealt only in passenger business. He made money, on a scale that no
government-operated line had yet been able to approach.
Mel sank down to the floor, continuing to shift through the other things
in the drawer.
His hand stopped. He remained motionless as recognition showered sudden
frantic questions in his mind. There lay a ticket envelope marked
Connemorra Lines.
The envelope was empty when he looked inside, and there was no name on
it. But it was worn. As if it might have been carried to Mars and back.
In sudden frenzy he began examining each article and laying it in a
careless pile on the floor. He recognized a pair of idiotic Martian
dolls. He found a tourist map of the ruined cities of Mars. He found a
menu from the Red Sands Hotel.
And below all these there was a picture album. Alice at the Red Sands.
Alice at the Phobos Oasis. Alice at the Darnella Ruins. He turned the
pages of the album with numb fingers. Alice in a dozen Martian settings.
Some of them were dated. About two years ago. They had gone together,
Alice had said, but there was no evidence of Mel's presence on any such
trip.
But it was equally impossible that Alice had made the trip, yet here was
proof. Proof that swept him up in a doubting of his own senses. How
could such a thing have taken place? Had he actually made such a trip
and been stripped of the memory by some amnesia? Maybe he had forced
himself to go with her and the power of his lifelong phobia had wiped it
from his memory.
And what did it all have to do--if anything--with the unbelievable thing
Dr. Winters had found about Alice?
Overcome with grief and exhaustion he sat fingering the mementos
aimlessly while he stared at the pictures and the ticket envelope and
the souvenirs.
  *  *  *  *  *
Dr. Winters spoke a little more sharply than he intended. "I don't think
anything is going to be solved by a wild-goose chase to Mars. It's going
to cost you a great deal of money, and there isn't a single positive
lead to any solution."
"It's the only possible explanation." Mel persisted. "Something happened
on Mars to change her from what she once was to--what you saw on your
operating table."
"And you are hoping that in some desperate way you will find there was a
switch of personalities--that there may be a ghost of a chance of
finding Alice still alive."
Mel bit his lip. He was scarcely willing to admit such a hope but it was
the foundation of his decision. "I've got to do what I can," he said.
"I must take the chance. The uncertainty will torment me all my life if
I don't."
Dr. Winters shook his head. "I still wish I could persuade you against
it. You will find only disappointment."
"My mind is made up. Will you help me or not?"
"What can I do?"
"I can't go into space unless I can find some way of lifting, even
temporarily, this phobia that nearly drives me crazy at the thought of
going out there. Isn't there a drug, a hypnotic method, or something to
help a thing like this?"
"This isn't my field," said Dr. Winters. "But I suspect that the cause
of your trouble cannot be suppressed. It will have to be lifted.
Psycho-recovery is the only way to accomplish that. I can recommend a
number of good men. This, too, is very expensive."
"I should have done it for Alice--long ago," said Mel.
  *  *  *  *  *
Dr. Martin, the psychiatrist, was deeply interested in Mel's problem.
"It sounds as if it is based on some early trauma, which has long since
been wiped from your conscious memory. Recovery may be easy or
difficult, depending on how much suppression of the original event has
taken place."
"I don't even care what the original event was," said Mel, "if you rid
me of this overwhelming fear of space. Dr. Winters said he thought
recovery would be required."
"He is right. No matter how much overlay you pile on top of such a
phobia to suppress it, it will continue to haunt you. We can make a
trial run to analyze the situation, and then we can better predict the
chance of ultimate success."
As a reporter, Mel Hastings had had vague encounters with the subject of
psycho-recovery, but he knew little of the details about it. He knew it
involved some kind of a machine that could tap the very depths of the
human mind and drag out the hidden debris accumulated in mental
basements and attics. But such things had always given him the willies.
He steered clear of them.
When Dr. Martin first introduced him into the psycho-recovery room his
resolution almost vanished. It looked more like a complex electronic
laboratory than anything else. A half dozen operators and assistants in
nurses' uniforms stood by.
"If you will recline here--," Dr. Martin was saying.
Mel felt as if he were being prepared for some inhuman biological
experiment. A cage of terminals was fitted to his head and a thousand
small electrodes adjusted to contact with his skull. The faint hum of
equipment supported the small surge of apprehension within him.
After half an hour the preparations were complete. The level of lights
in the room was lowered. He could sense the operators at their panels
and see dimly the figure of Dr. Martin seated near him.
"Try to recall as vividly as possible your last experience with this
nightmare you have described. We will try to lock on to that and follow
it on down."
This was the last thing in the world Mel wanted to do. He lay in
agonized indecision, remembering that he had dreamed only a short time
ago, but fighting off the actual recollection of the dream.
"Let yourself go," Dr. Martin said kindly. "Don't fight it--"
A fragment of his mind let down its guard for a brief instant. It was
like touching the surface of a whirlpool. He was sucked into the
sweeping depths of the dream. He sensed that he cried out in terror as
he plunged. But there was no one to hear. He was alone in space.
Fear wrapped him like black, clammy fur. He felt the utter futility of
even being afraid. He would simply remain as he was, and soon he would
cease to be.
But they were coming again. He sensed, rather than saw them. The
searchers. And his fear of them was greater than his fear of space
alone. He moved. Somehow he moved, driving headlong through great
vastness while the pinpoints of light grew behind him.
"Very satisfactory," Dr. Martin was saying. "An extremely satisfactory
probe."
His voice came through to Mel as from beyond vast barriers of time and
space. Mel felt the thick sweat that covered his body. Weakness throbbed
in his muscles.
"It gives us a very solid anchor point," Dr. Martin said. "From here I
think we run back to the beginning of the experience and unearth the
whole thing. Are you ready, Mr. Hastings?"
Mel felt too weak to nod. "Let 'er rip!" he muttered weakly.
  *  *  *  *  *
The day was warm and sunny. He and Alice had arrived early at the
spaceport to enjoy the holiday excitement preceding the takeoff. It was
something they had both dreamed of since they were kids--a vacation in
the fabulous domed cities and ruins of Mars.
Alice was awed by her first close view of the magnificent ship lying in
its water berth that opened to Lake Michigan. "It's _huge_--how can such
an enormous ship ever get off the Earth?"
Mel laughed. "Let's not worry about that. We know it does. That's all
that matters." But he could not help being impressed, too, by the
enormous size and the graceful lines of the luxury ship. Unlike Alice,
he was not seeing it at close range for the first time. He had met the
ship scores of times in his reporting job, interviewing famous and
well-known personages as they departed or arrived from the fabulous
playgrounds of Mars.
"If you look carefully," Mel pointed out, "you'll see a lot of faces
that make news when they come and go."
Alice's face glowed as she clung to Mel's arm and recognized some of the
famous citizens who would be their fellow passengers. "This is going to
be the most fun we've ever had in our lives, darling."
"Like a barrel of monkeys," Mel said casually, enjoying the bubbling
excitement that was in Alice.
The ship was so completely stabilized that the passengers did not even
have to sit down during takeoff. They crowded the ports to watch the
land and the water shoot past as the ship skimmed half the length of
Lake Michigan in its takeoff run. As it bore into the upper atmosphere
on an ever-increasing angle of climb, its own artificial gravity system
took over and gave the illusion of horizontal flight with the Earth
receding slowly behind.
Mel and Alice wandered through the salons and along the spacious decks
as if in some fairyland-come-true. All sense of time seemed to vanish
and they floated with the great ship in timeless, endless space.
He wasn't quite certain when he first became aware of his own sense of
disquietude. It seemed to result from a change in the members of the
crew. On the morning of the third day they ceased their universal and
uninterrupted concern for their passengers' entertainment and enjoyment.
Most of the passengers seemed to have taken no note of it. Mel commented
to Alice. She laughed at him. "What do you expect? They've spent two
full days showing us the ship and teaching us to play all the games
aboard. You don't expect them to play nurse to us during the whole trip,
do you?"
It sounded reasonable. "I suppose so," said Mel dubiously. "But just
what _are_ they doing? They all seem to be in such a hurry to get
somewhere this morning."
"Well, they must have some duties to perform in connection with running
the ship."
Mel shook his head in doubt.
  *  *  *  *  *
Alice joined him in wandering about the decks, kibitzing on the games of
the other passengers, and watching the stars and galaxies on the
telescopic screens. It was on one of these that they first saw the
shadow out in space. Small at first, the black shadow crossed a single
star and made it wink. That was what caught Mel's attention, a winking
star in the dead night of space.
When he was sure, he called Alice's attention to it. "There's something
moving out there." By now it had shape, like a tiny black bullet.
"Where? I don't see anything."
"It's crossing that patch of stars. Watch, and you can see it blot them
out as it moves."
"It's another ship!" Alice exclaimed. "That's exciting! To think we're
passing another ship in all this great emptiness of space! I wonder
where it's coming from?"
"And where it's going to."
They watched its slow, precise movement across the stars. After several
minutes a steward passed by. Mel hailed him and pointed to the screen.
"Can you tell us what that other ship is?"
The steward glanced and seemed to recognize it instantly. But he paused
in replying. "That's the Mars liner," he said finally. "In just a few
minutes the public address system will announce contact and change of
ship."
"Change of ship?" Mel asked, puzzled. "I never heard anything about a
change of ship."
"Oh, yes," the steward said. "This is only the shuttle that we're on
now. We transfer to the liner for the remainder of the trip. I'm sure
that was explained to you at the time you purchased your tickets." He
hurried away.
Mel was quite sure no such thing had been explained to him when he
purchased tickets. He turned back to the screen and watched the black
ship growing swiftly larger now as it and the Martian Princess
approached on contact courses.
The public address system came alive suddenly. "This is your Captain.
All passengers will now prepare to leave the shuttle and board the Mars
liner. Hand luggage should be made ready. All luggage stowed in the hold
will be transferred without your attention. It has been a pleasure to
have you aboard. Contact with the liner will be made in fifteen
minutes."
From the buzz around him Mel knew that this was as much a surprise to
everyone else as it was to him, but it was greeted with excitement and
without question.
Even Alice was growing excited now and others crowded around them when
it was discovered what they were viewing. "It looks _big_," said Alice
in subdued voice. "Bigger than this ship by far."
Mel moved away and let the others have his place before the screen. His
sense of uneasiness increased as he contemplated the approach of that
huge black ship. And he was convinced its color _was_ black, that it was
not just the monotone of the view screen that made it so.
Why should there be such a transfer of passengers in mid-space? The
Martian Princess was certainly adequate to make the journey to Mars.
Actually they were more than a third of the way there, already. He
wasn't sure why he felt so certain something was amiss. Surely there was
no possibility that the great Connemorra Lines would plan any procedure
to the detriment of the more than five thousand passengers aboard the
ship. His uneasiness was pretty stupid, he thought.
But it wouldn't go away.
He returned to the crowd clustered at the viewing screen and took Alice
by the arm to draw her away.
She looked quizzically at him. "This is the most exciting thing yet. I
want to watch it."
"We haven't got much time," Mel said. "We've got a lot of things to get
in our suitcases. Let's go down to our stateroom."
"Everyone else has to pack, too. There's no hurry."
"Fifteen minutes, the Captain said. We don't want to be the last ones."
Unwillingly, Alice followed. Their stateroom was a long way from the
salon. The fifteen minutes were almost up by the time they reached it.
  *  *  *  *  *
Mel closed the door to their room and put his hands on Alice's
shoulders. He glanced about warily. "Alice--I don't want to go aboard
that ship. There's something wrong about this whole thing. I don't know
what it is, but we're not going aboard."
Alice stared at him. "Have you lost your mind? After all our hopes and
all our planning you don't want to go on to Mars?"
Mel felt as if a wall had suddenly sprung up between them. He clutched
Alice's shoulders desperately in his hands. "Alice--I don't think that
ship out there is going to Mars. I know it sounds crazy, but please
listen to me--we weren't told anything about the Martian Princess being
merely a shuttle and that we'd transfer to another ship out here. No one
was told. The Martian Princess is a space liner perfectly capable of
going to Mars. There's no reason why such a huge ship should be used
merely as a shuttle."
"That ship out there is bigger."
"Why? Do we need any more room to finish the journey?"
Alice shook herself out of his grasp. "I don't know the answers to those
questions and I don't care to know them!" she said angrily.
"If you think I'm going to give up this vacation and turn right around
here in space and go back home you're crazy. If you go back you'll go
back alone!"
Alice whirled and ran to the door. Mel ran after her, but she was
through the door and was melting into the moving throng by the time he
reached the door. He took a step to follow, then halted. He couldn't
drag her forcibly back into the stateroom. Maybe she'd return in a few
minutes to pack her bags. He went back in the room and closed the door.
  *  *  *  *  *
Even as he did so he knew that he was guessing wrong. Alice would be
matching him in a game of nerves. She'd go on to the other ship,
expecting him to pack the bags and follow. He sat down on the bed and
put his head in his hands for a moment. A faint shudder passed through
the ship and he heard the hollow ring of clashing metal. The unknown
ship had made contact with the Martian Princess. Their airlocks were
being mated now.
From the porthole he could see the incredible mass of the ship. He
crossed the room and pressed the curtains aside. His impression had been
right. The ship _was_ black. Black, nameless, and blind. No insignia or
portholes were visible anywhere on the hull within his range of vision.
He didn't know what he was going to do, but he knew above all else that
he wasn't going to board that ship. He paced the floor telling himself
it was a stupid, neurotic apprehension that filled his mind, that the
great Connemorra Lines could not be involved in any nefarious acts
involving five thousand people--or even one person. They couldn't afford
such risk.
He couldn't shake it. He was certain that, no matter what the cost, he
was not going to board that black ship.
He looked about the stateroom. He couldn't remain here. They'd certainly
find him. He had to hide somewhere. He stood motionless, staring out the
porthole. There was no place he could hide with assurance inside the
ship.
But what about outside?
His thoughts crumpled in indecision as he thought of Alice. Yet whatever
the black ship meant, he could help no one if he went aboard. He had to
get back to Earth and try to find out what it was all about and alert
the authorities. Only in that way could he hope to help Alice.
  *  *  *  *  *
He opened the stateroom door cautiously and stepped out. The corridor
was filled with hurrying passengers, carrying hand luggage, laughing
with each other in excitement. He joined them, moving slowly, alert for
crew members. There seemed to be none of the latter in the corridors.
Keeping close to the wall, he moved with the crowd until he reached the
rounded niche that marked an escape chamber. As if pushed by the
hurrying throng, he backed into it, the automatic doors opening and
closing to receive him.
The chamber was one of scores stationed throughout the ship as required
by law. The escape chambers contained space suits for personal exit from
the ship in case of emergency. They were never expected to be used. In
any emergency requiring abandonment of the vessel it would be as
suicidal to go into space in a suit as to remain with the ship. But
fusty lawmakers had decreed their necessity, and passengers received a
perfunctory briefing in the use of the chambers and the suits--which
they promptly forgot.
Mel wrestled now with what he remembered of the instructions. He
inspected a suit hanging in its cabinet and then was relieved to find
that the instructions were repeated on a panel of the cabinet. Slowly,
he donned the suit, following the step by step instructions as he went.
He began to sweat profusely from his exertions and from his fear of
discovery.
He finally succeeded in getting the cumbersome gear adjusted and
fastened without being detected. He did not know if the airlock of the
chamber had some kind of alarm that would alert the crew when it was
opened. That was a chance he had to take. He discovered that it was
arranged so that it could be opened only by a key operated from within
the suit. This was obviously to prevent anyone leaving the ship
unprotected. Perhaps with this safeguard there was no alarm.
He twisted the lock and entered the chamber. He opened the outer door
and faced the night of space.
  *  *  *
He would not have believed that anything could be so utterly terrifying.
His knees buckled momentarily and left him clinging to the side of the
port. Sweat burst anew from every pore. Blindly, he pressed the jet
control and forced himself into space.
He arced a short distance along the curve of the ship and then forced
himself down into contact with the hull. He clung by foot and hand
magnetic pads, sick with nausea and vertigo.
He had believed that by clinging to the outside of the hull he could
escape detection and endure the flight back to Earth. In his sickness of
body and mind the whole plan now looked like utter folly. He retched and
closed his eyes and lay on the hull through the beginning of an
eternity.
  *  *  *  *  *
He had no concept of time. The chronometer in the suit was not working.
But it seemed as if many hours had passed when he felt a faint shock
pass through the hull beneath him. He felt a momentary elation. The
ships had separated. The search for him--if any--had been abandoned.
Slowly he inched his way around the hull to get a glimpse of the black
ship. It was still there, standing off a few hundred yards but not
moving. Its presence dismayed him. There could be no reason now for the
two ships to remain together. The Martian Princess should be turning
around for the return to Earth.
Then out of the corner of his eye he saw it. A trace of movement. A
gleam of light. Like a small moon it edged up the distant curvature of
the hull. Then there were more--a nest of quivering satellites.
Without thought, Mel pressed the jet control and hurled himself into
space.
The terror of his first plunge was multiplied by the presence of the
searchers. Crewmen of the Martian Princess, he supposed. The absence of
the space suit had probably been discovered.
In headlong flight, he became aware of eternity and darkness and
loneliness. The sun was a hot, bright disc, but it illuminated nothing.
All that his mind clung to for identification of itself and the
universe around it was gone. He was like a primeval cell, floating
without origin, without purpose, without destination.
Only a glimmer of memory pierced the thick terror with a shaft of
rationality. Alice. He must survive for Alice's sake. He must find the
way back to Alice--back to Earth.
He looked toward the Martian Princess and the searchers on the hull. He
cried out in the soundless dark. The searchers had left the hull and
were pursuing him through open space. Their speed far exceeded his. It
was futile to run before them--and futile to leave the haven of the
Martian Princess. His only chance of survival or success lay in getting
to Earth aboard the ship. In a long curve he arced back toward the ship.
Instantly, the searchers moved to close in the arc and meet him on a
collision course.
He could see them now. They were not crewmen in spacesuits as he had
supposed. Rather, the objects--two of them--looked like miniature
spaceships. Beams of light bore through space ahead of them, and he
suspected they carried other radiations also to detect by radar and
infra red.
In the depths of his mind he knew they were not of the Martian Princess.
Nor were there any crewmen within them. They were robot craft of some
kind, and they had come from the great black ship.
He felt their searching beams upon him and waited for a deadly, blasting
burst of heat or killing radiation. He was not prepared for what
happened.
  *  *  *  *  *
They closed swiftly, and the nearest robot came within a dozen feet,
matching Mel's own velocity. Suddenly, from a small opening in the
machine, a slender metal tentacle whipped out and wrapped about him like
the coils of a snake. The second robot approached and added another
binding. Mel's arms and legs were pinned. Frantically, he manipulated
the jet control in the glove of the suit. This only caused the tentacles
to cut deeply and painfully, and threatened to smash the shell of the
suit. He cut the jets and admitted the failure of his frantic mission.
In short minutes they were near the ships again. Mel wondered what kind
of reprimand the crewmen of the Martian Princess could give him, and
what fantastic justification they might offer for their own actions.
But he wasn't being taken toward the Martian Princess. He twisted
painfully in the grip of the robot tentacles and confirmed that he was
being carried to the black stranger.
Soundlessly, a port slid open and the robots swept him through into the
dark interior of the ship. He felt himself dropped on a hard metal
floor. The tentacles unwound. Alone, he struggled to his feet and
flashed a beam of light from the suit flashlight to the walls about him.
Walls, floor and ceiling were an indistinguishable dark gray. He was the
only object in the chamber.
While he strained his sight to establish features in the blank metallic
surfaces a clipped, foreign voice spoke. "Remove your suit and walk
toward the opening in the wall. Do not try to run or attack. You will
not be harmed unless you attack."
There was no use refusing. He did as commanded. A bright doorway opened
in the wall before him. He walked through.
It reminded him of a medical laboratory. Shelves and cabinets of hand
instruments and electronic equipment were about. And in the room three
men sat watching the doorway through which he entered. He gazed at the
strangers as they at him.
They looked ordinary enough in their white surgeons' smocks. All seemed
to be of middle age, with dark hair turning gray at the fringe. One was
considerably more muscular than the other two. One leaned to overweight.
The third was quite thin. Yet Mel felt himself bristling like a dog in
the dark of the moon.
No matter how ordinary they looked, these three were not men of Earth.
The certainty of this settled like a cold, dead weight in the pit of his
stomach.
"You--" he stammered. There was nothing to say.
"Please recline on this couch," the nearest, the muscular one said. "We
wish you no harm so do not be afraid. We wish only to determine if you
have been harmed by your flight into space."
All three of them were tense and Mel was sure they were worried--by his
escapade. Had he nearly let some unknown cat out of the bag?
"Please--," the muscular one said.
He had no alternative. He might struggle, and destroy a good deal of
apparatus, but he could not hope to overwhelm them. He lay on the couch
as directed. Almost instantly the overweight one was behind him, seizing
his arm. He felt the sting of a needle. The thin one was at his feet,
looking down at him soberly. "He will rest," the thin one said, "and
then we shall know what needs to be done."
  *  *  *
The sleep had lasted for an eon, he thought. He had a sense of the
passage of an enormous span of time when he at last awoke. His vision
was fuzzy, but there was no mistaking the image before him.
Alice. His Alice--safe.
She was sitting on the edge of the bed, smiling down at him. He fought
his way up to a half-sitting position. "Alice!" He wept.
Afterwards, he said, "Where are we? What happened? I remember so many
crazy things--the vacation to Mars."
"Don't try to remember it all, darling," she said. "You were sick. Some
kind of hysteria and amnesia hit you while we were there. We're home
now. You'll soon be out of the hospital and everything will be all
right."
"I spoiled it," he murmured. "I spoiled it all for you."
"No. I knew you were going to be all right. I even had a lot of fun all
by myself. But we're going back. As soon as you are all well again we'll
start saving up and go again."
He nodded drowsily. "Sure. We'll go to Mars again and have a real
vacation."
Alice faded away. All of it faded away.
  *  *  *  *  *
As if from a far distance the walls of Dr. Martin's laboratory seemed to
close about him and the lights slowly increased. Dr. Martin was seated
beside him, his head shaking slowly. "I'm so terribly sorry, Mr.
Hastings. I thought we were going to get the full and true event this
time. But it often happens, as in your case, that fantasy lies upon
fantasy, and it is necessary to dig through great layers of them before
uncovering the truth. I think, however, that we shall not have to go
much deeper to find the underlying truth for you."
Mel lay on the couch, continuing to stare at the ceiling. "Then there
was no great, black ship out of space?"
"Of course not! That is one danger of these analyses, Mr. Hastings. You
must not be deceived into believing that a newly discovered fantasy is
the truth for which you were looking. You must come back and continue
your search."
"Yes. Yes, of course." He got up slowly and was helped to the outer room
by the Doctor and an attendant. The attendant gave him a glass of white,
sweetish substance to drink.
"A booster-upper," laughed Dr. Martin. "It takes away the grogginess
that sometimes attends such a deep sweep. We will look for you day after
tomorrow."
Mel nodded and stepped out into the hall.
  *  *  *
No great black ship.
No mysterious little robot ships with tentacles that whip out and
capture a man.
No strange trio in surgeons' gowns.
And no Alice--
A sudden spear of thought pierced his mind. Maybe all that was
illusion, too. Maybe he could go home right now and find her waiting for
him. Maybe--
No. That was real enough. The accident. Dr. Winters. The scene in the
icy room next to Surgery at the hospital. Dr. Martin didn't know about
that. He would have called that a fantasy, too, if Mel had tried to tell
him.
No. It was all real.
The unbelievable, alien organs of Alice.
The great, black ship.
The mindless robot searchers.
His nightmare had stemmed from all this that had happened out in space,
which had somehow been wiped from his conscious memory. The nightmare
had not existed in his boyhood, as he had thought. It was oriented in
time now.
But what had happened to Alice? There was no clue in the memory
unearthed by Dr. Martin. Was her condition merely the result of some
freak heredity or gene mutation?
The surging turmoil in his mind was greater than before. There was only
one way to quiet it--that was to carry out his original plan to go to
Mars.
He'd go out there again. He'd find out if the black ship existed or not.
  *  *  *  *  *
The girl in the ticket office was kind but firm. "Our records show that
you were a vacationer to Mars very recently. The demand is so great and
the ship capacity so small that we must limit vacation trips to no more
than one in any ten-year period."
He turned away and went down the hall and out the doorway of the marble
and brass Connemorra Lines Building.
He walked through town for six blocks and the thought of old Jake Norton
came to his mind. Jake had been an old timer in the city room when Mel
was a cub. Jake had retired just a few months ago and lived in a place
in town with a lot of other old men. Mel hailed the nearest cab and
drove to Jake's place.
"Mel, it's great to see you!" Jake said. "I didn't think any of the boys
would remember an old man after he'd walked out for the last time."
"People remember real easy when they want favors."
"Sure," Jake said with a grin, "but there's not much of a favor I can do
you any more, boy. Can't even loan you a ten until next payday."
"Jake, you can help me," said Mel. "You don't expect to ever take a trip
to Mars, do you?"
"Mars! Are you crazy, Mel?"
"I went once. I've got to go again. It's about Alice. And they won't let
me. I didn't know you could go only once in ten years."
Jake remembered. Alice had called him and all the other boys after
they'd come back the other time. Mel had been sick, she said. He
wouldn't remember the trip. They were asked not to say anything about
it. Now Mel was remembering and wanted to go again. Jake didn't know
what he should do.
"What can I do to help you?" he asked.
"I'll give you the money. Buy a ticket in your name. I'll go as Jake
Norton. I think I can get away with it. I don't think they make any
closer check than that."
"Sure--if it'll do you any good," Jake said hesitantly. He was
remembering the anxiety in Alice's voice the day she called and begged
him not to say anything that would remind Mel of Mars. No one ever had,
as far as Jake knew.
He took the money and Mel waited at the old men's home. An hour later
Jake called. "Eight months is the closest reservation I can get at
normal rates, but I know of some scalpers who charge 50% more."
Mel groaned. "Buy it no matter what the cost! I've got to go at once!"
He would be broke for the next ten years.
  *  *  *  *  *
It was little different from the other time. There was the same holiday
excitement in the crowd of vacationers and those who had come to see
them off. It was the same ship, even.
All that was different was the absence of Alice.
He stayed in his stateroom and didn't watch the takeoff. He felt the
faint rocking motion as the ship went down its long waterway. He felt
the shift as the artificial gravity took over. He lay on the bed and
closed his eyes as the Martian Princess sought the cold night of space.
For two days he remained in the room, emerging only for meals. The trip
itself held no interest for him. He waited only for the announcement
that the black ship had come.
But by the end of the second day it had not come. Mel spent a sleepless
night staring out at the endless horizon of stars. Dr. Martin had been
right, he thought. There was no black ship. He had merely substituted
one illusion for another. Where was reality? Did it exist anywhere in
all the world?
Yet, even if there were no black ship, his goal was still Mars.
The third day passed without the appearance of the black ship. But on
the very evening of that day the speaker announced: "All passengers will
prepare for transfer from the shuttle ship to the Mars liner. Bring hand
luggage--"
Mel sat paralyzed while he listened to the announcement. So it was true!
He felt the faint jar that rocked the Martian Princess as the two ships
coupled. From his stateroom port Mel could see the stranger, black,
ugly, and somehow deadly. He wished he could show Dr. Martin this
"illusion"!
He packed swiftly and left the room. Mel joined the surprised and
excited throng now, not hanging back, but eager to find out the secret
of the great black ship.
The transition from one ship to the other was almost imperceptible. The
structure of both corridors was the same, but Mel knew when the junction
was crossed. He sensed the entry into a strange world that was far
different from the common one he knew.
Far down the corridor the crowd was slowing, forming into lines before
stewards who were checking tickets. The passengers were shunted into
branching corridors leading to their own staterooms. So far everything
was so utterly normal that Mel felt an overwhelming despondency. It was
just as they had been told; they were transferring to the Mars liner
from the shuttle.
The steward glanced at his ticket, held it for a moment of hesitation
while he scanned Mel's face. "Mr. Norton--please come with me."
The steward moved away in a direction no other passengers were taking.
Another steward moved up to his place. "That way," the second man said
to Mel. "Follow the steward."
  *  *  *  *  *
Mel's heart picked up its beat as he stepped out of the line and moved
slowly down the corridor after the retreating steward. They walked a
long way through branching silent corridors that showed no sign of life.
They stopped at last before a door that was like a score of others they
had passed. There were no markings. The steward opened the door and
stood aside. "In here please," he said. Mel entered and found himself
alone. The steward remained outside.
The room was furnished as an office. It was carpeted and paneled
luxuriously. A door leading from a room at his left opened and admitted
a tall man with graying hair. The man seemed to carry an aura of power
and strength as he moved. An aura that Mel Hastings recognized.
"James Connemorra!" Mel exclaimed.
The man bowed his head slightly in acknowledgement. "Yes, Mr. Hastings,"
he said.
Mel was dismayed. "How do you know who I am?" he said.
James Connemorra looked through the port beside Mel and at the stars
beyond. "I have been looking for you long enough I ought to know who you
are."
Something in the man's voice chilled Mel. "I have been easy enough to
find. I'm only a news reporter. Why have you been looking for me?"
Connemorra sank into a deep chair on the opposite side of the room.
"Can't you guess?" he said.
"It has something to do with what happened--before?" Mel asked. He
backed warily against the opposite wall from Connemorra. "That time when
I escaped from the Martian Princess rather than come aboard the black
ship?"
Connemorra nodded. "Yes."
"I still don't understand. Why?"
"It's an old story." Connemorra shrugged faintly. "A man learns too much
about things he should know nothing of."
"I have a right to know what happened to my wife. You know about her
don't you?"
Connemorra nodded.
"What happened to her? Why was she different after her trip to Mars?"
James Connemorra was silent for so long that Mel thought he had not
heard him. "Is everyone different when they get back?" Mel demanded.
"Does something happen to everybody who takes the Mars trip, the same
thing that happened to Alice?"
"You learned so much," said Connemorra, speaking as if to himself, "I
had to hunt you down and bring you here."
"What do you mean by that? I came through my own efforts. Your office
tried to stop me."
"Yet I knew who you were and that you were here. I must have had
something to do with it, don't you think?"
"What?"
"I forced you to come by deception, so that no one knows you are
here--except the old man whose name you used. Who will believe him that
you came on the Martian Princess? Our records will show that a Jake
Norton will be there on Earth. No one can ever prove that Mel Hastings
ever came aboard."
  *  *  *  *  *
Mel let his breath out slowly. His fear suddenly swallowed caution. He
took a crouching step forward. Then he stopped, frozen. James Connemorra
tilted the small pistol resting in his lap. Mel did not know how it came
to be there. He had not seen it a moment ago.
"What are you going to do?" Mel demanded. "What are you going to do with
all of us?"
"You know too much," said Connemorra, shrugging in mock helplessness.
"What _can_ I do with you?"
"Explain what I don't understand about the things you say I know."
"Explain to you?" The idea seemed to amuse Connemorra greatly, as if it
had some utterly ridiculous aspect. "Yes, I might as well explain," he
said. "I haven't had anyone interested enough to listen for a long time.
"Men have never been alone in space. We have been watched, inspected,
and studied periodically since Neanderthal times by races in the galaxy
who have preceded us in development by hundreds of thousands of years.
These observers have been pleasantly excited by some of the things we
have done, appalled by others.
"There is a galactic organization that has existed for at least a
hundred thousand years. This organization exists for the purpose of
mutual development of the worlds and races of the galaxy. It also exists
to maintain peace, for there were ages before its organization when
interstellar war took place, and more than one great world was wiped out
in such senseless wars.
"When men of Earth were ready to step into space, the Galactic Council
had to decide, as it had decided on so many other occasions, whether the
new world was to be admitted as a member. The choice is not one which a
new world is invited to make; the choice is made for it. A world which
begins to send its ships through space becomes a member of the Council,
or its ships cease to travel. The world itself may cease to exist."
"You mean this dictatorial Council determines whether a world is fit to
survive and actually wipes out those it decides against?" gasped Mel in
horror. "They set themselves up as judges in the Universe?"
"That's about the way they operate, to put it bluntly," said Connemorra.
"You can call them a thousand unpleasant names, but you can't change the
fact of their existence, nor the fact of their successful operation for
a period as long as the age of the human race.
"They would never have made their existence known to us if we had not
begun sending our ships into space. But once we did that we were
entering territory staked out by races that were there when we crawled
out of our caves. Who can say what their rights are?"
"But to pass judgment on entire worlds--"
"We have no choice but to accept that such judgment is passed."
"And their judgment of Earth--?"
"Was that Earth was not ready for Council membership. Earthmen are still
making too many blunders to join creatures that could cross the galaxy
at the speed of light when we were learning how to chip flint."
"But they didn't wipe us out!"
  *  *  *  *  *
James Connemorra looked out at the stars. "I wonder," he said. "I
wonder--"
"What do you mean?" Mel said in a tight voice.
"We have defects which are not quite like any they have encountered
before. We have developed skills in the manufacture of artifacts, but we
have no capacity for using them. For example, we have developed vast
systems of communication, but these systems have not improved our
communications they have actually blocked communication."
"That's crazy!" said Mel. "Do they suppose smoke signals are superior to
the 3-d screens in our homes?"
"As a matter of fact, they do. And so do I. When a man must resort to
smoke signals he is very certain that he has something to say before he
goes to the trouble of putting the message in the air. But our fabulous
screens prevent us from communicating with each other by throwing up a
wall of pseudo-communication that we can't get through. We subject
ourselves to a barrage of sound and light that has a communication
content of almost zero.
"The same is true of our inventions in transportation. We have efficient
means of travel to all parts of the world and now to the Universe
itself. But we don't travel. We use our machines to block traveling."
"I can understand the first argument, but not this one!" said Mel.
"We move our bodies to new locations with our machines, but our minds
remain at home. We take our rutted thoughts, our predispositions, our
cultural concepts wherever we go. We do not touch, even with a fragment
of our minds, that which our machines give us contact with. We do not
travel. We move in space, but we do not travel.
"This is their accusation. And they're right. We are still doing what we
have always done. We are using space flight for the boring, the trivial,
the stupid; using genius for a toy, like a child banging an atomic watch
on the floor. It happened with all our great discoveries and inventions:
the gasoline engine, the telephone, the wireless. We've built
civilizations of monumental stupidity on the wonders of nature. One race
of the Galactics has a phrase they apply to people like us: 'If there is
a God in Heaven He has wept for ten thousand years.'
  *  *  *  *  *
"But all this is not the worst. A race that is merely stupid seldom gets
out to space. But ours has something else they fear: destructiveness.
They have plotted our history and extrapolated our future. If they let
us come out, war and conflict will follow."
"They can't know that!"
"They say they can. We are in no position to argue."
"So they plan to destroy us--"
"No. They want to try an experiment that has been carried out just a few
times previously. They are going to reduce us from what they term the
critical mass which we have achieved."
"Critical mass? That's a nuclear term."
"Right. Meaning ready to blow up. That's where we are. Two not-so-minor
nuclear wars in fifty years. They see us carrying our destructiveness
into space, fighting each other there, infecting other races with our
hostility. But if we are broken down into smaller groups, have the tools
of war removed, and are forced to take another line of development--well,
they have hopes of salvaging us."
"But they can't do a thing like that to us! What do they intend? Taking
groups of Earthmen, deporting them to other worlds--breaking them apart
from each other forever--?"
The coldness found its resting place in Mel's chest. He stared at James
Connemorra. Then his eyes moved slowly over the walls of the room in the
black ship and out to the stars. The black ship.
"This ship--! You transfer your passengers to this Galactic ship for
deportation to other worlds! But they come back--"
"They are sent to colonies on other worlds where conditions are like
those on Earth--with significant exceptions. The colonies are small,
the largest are only a few thousand. The problems there are different
than on Earth--and they are tough. The natural resources are not the
same. The development of the resulting cultures will be vastly different
from that of Earth. The Galactic Council is very interested in the
outcome--which will not be known with certainty for a thousand years or
so."
"But they come back," Mel repeated. "You bring them back!"
"For each Earthman who goes out, a replacement is sent back. The
replacement is an android supplied by the Council."
"Android!" Mel felt his reason slipping. He knew he was shouting. "Then
Alice--the Alice that died was an android, she was not my wife! My Alice
is still alive! You can take me to her--"
Connemorra nodded. "Alice is still alive, and well. No harm has come to
her."
"Take me to her!" Mel knew he was pleading, but in his anguish he had no
pride.
Connemorra seemed to ignore his plea. "Earth's population is slowly
being diluted by the removal of top people. The androids behave in every
way like the individuals they replace, but they are preconditioned
against the inherent destructiveness of Earthmen."
Blind anger seemed to rise within Mel. "You have no right to separate
me from Alice. Take me to her!"
His rage ignited and he leaped forward.
The small gun in Connemorra's hand spurted twice. Mel felt a double
impact in a moment of great wonder. It couldn't end like this, he
thought. It couldn't end without his seeing Alice once more. Just once
more--
  *  *  *  *  *
He sank to the floor. The pain was not great, but he knew he was dying.
He looked down at his hand that covered the great wound in his
mid-section. There was something wrong.
He felt the stickiness, but the red blood was not welling out. Instead,
a thick bubble of green ooze moved from the wound and spread over his
clothes and his hand. An alien greenness that was like nothing human.
He had seen it once before.
Alice.
He stared up at Connemorra with wide, wondering eyes.
"Everything went wrong, my poor android," said Connemorra softly. "After
your human was brought back to the ship we were forced to go through
with the usual process of imprinting his mind content upon his android.
But we had to wipe out all memory of the attempted escape from the
Martian Princess. This was not successful. It still clung in the
nightmares you experienced. And the psycho-recovery brought it all back.
"We tried to cover it with an amnesiac condition instead of the usual
pre-printed memory of a Mars vacation. And all this might have worked if
the Alice android had not been defective also. A normal android has
protective mechanisms that make accidents and subsequent discovery
impossible. But the Alice android failed, and you set out on a course to
uncover us. I had to find a way to destroy you--murder.
"I'm truly sorry. I don't know how an android thinks or feels. Sometimes
I'm afraid of all of you. You are like men, but I've seen the factories
in which you are produced. There are many things I do not know. I know
only that I had to obey the Galactic Council or Earth would have been
destroyed long ago.
"And something else I know: Alice and Mel Hastings are content and
happy. They are on a lovely world, very much like Central Valley."
He closed his eyes as he felt the life--or whatever it was--seeping out
of him. It came out right, after all, he thought.
Like a wooden soldier with a painted smile, fallen from a shelf, he lay
twisted upon the floor.
THE END
Transcriber's Note:
  This etext was produced from _Amazing Stories_ December 1961.
  Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
  copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
  typographical errors have been corrected without note.