Y 



VOL. 39. NO. 11 
SI. 25 



Science Fiction 



THE INVASION OF AMERICA 
A Complete Novel 

INTERFACE/INTERSPACE 
Breakthroughs From 
The Paranormal 



MOONWATCH- 
Is NASAGATE Covering 
Up Alien Landing 
On Our Moon? 

A BEAST FOR NORM 
This Month's Novelette 




GALILEAN SATELLITES 
Jupiter and Its Four 
Planet Size Moons 
Photographed j / 

by Voyager 1 S ' 





The gift of 
known to awry few. 

in the harsh, strife-torn land which had 
once been held together by its mystical 
power. One of these few, a wizard, bestows 
his knowledge on the youth Orin, and urges 
him to undertake a quest to find the Song 
of the Kingdom and release it from its 
prison in the distant mountains. Orin is 
joined by two others also blessed with the 
gift of music. Drawn together by the forces 
of their melodies, propelled 
past obstacles by the vision 
of a better world, the three 
at last come to stand 
before Star Peak... and a 
gentle fantasy of magic and 
comradeship reaches its 





A Horsecians Novel 

Robert Adams 

"THE HORSECLANS BOOKS ARE AMONG THE BEST ADVENTURE STORIES." 
— Andre Norton 

In post-Apocalyptic America the nomadic Horsecians battle the decadent city-states of 
the Ehlee nee . Can the Horsecians, through the strength of their swords and their very 
special mental talents , save civilization from destruction? 

SIGNET IS PROUD TO PRESENT ROBERT ADAMS' HORSECLANS BOOKS— A 
ROUSING ADVENTURE SERIES IN THE SWORD -SWINGING TRADITION OF CONAN . 

Q) SIGNET SF/$1. 75 





Arnold E. Abramson, Publisher 

Editor: Hank Stine Contributing Artist: Ken Smith 

Asst. Editor: Ken Hedberg Contributing Editor: R.E. Geis 

Editorial Asst.: Alice Simmons Staff Artist: Robert Ramsey 

Subscription Dept: L.C. Murphy Design: Stan Taylor 

Readers: D. Blackwell; C. Collins; P. Adkins. Art Staff: E. Lakin, C. Grenier; 
J. Aguirre. 



EDITORIAL 4 

THE INVASION OF AMERICA (Complete Novel) 

Gil Lamont 5 

How many nations, secretly, only wait for the day 
they can see their way clear? 

STAR WARRIORS (II of II) Jesse Peel 35 

If desperation is the mother of invention — then 
2000 ships against 1 is a “mother" of a problem! 

SF HOTLINE Warren/Elliott 60 

What’s happening in the SF world from coast-to- 
coast and border-to-border! 

A BEAST FOR NORN (Novelette) George R.R. Martin 63 

Making dumb beasts fight for sport is cruelty ... so 
what punishment fits this crime? 



INTERFACE/INTERSPACE Beal/Chalfin 

Breakthroughs from the scientific horizon and 
from the scientific investigation of the paranormal. 



82 




B5 



THE DEPRESSION OF I960 (story) 

George Alec Effinger 

It’s just around the comer. and it's coming 
ready or not! 

JEM (IV of V) Fred Pohl 89 

The snake has struck in the Garden of Jem and 
now everyone is tasting the bitterness of forbid- 
den fruit! 

A LITTLE GIRL’S SPRING DAY IN MODERAN 

(story) David Bunch , 122 

Before Bionics there was Moderan . after Mod- 
eran you will never be the same. 

SF MART 127 



Cover by Craig Black 
from the Invasion of America 

Interior Illustrations: Steffan, Bensusen, 
Cooper, Shaw, Ramsey, Smith 



GALAXY, Incorporating Worlds of IF. September/ October ,1979. Volume 39, Number 11. Published 6 times a 
year (February. April, June, August, October, December) by UPD Publishing Corporation, a subsidiary of 
Universal Publishing and Distributing Corporation. Main office and editorial office: 720 White Plains Road. 
Scarsdale, New York 10583. Single copy price $1 .25: one-year (6 issue) subscription $7.50; two-year (12-issue) 
subscription $15.00. For Canada add $2.00 per year; other Foreign countries add $3.00 per year. 

Copyright * 1979 by UPD Publishing Corporation under International, Universal and Pan-American Copy- 
right Conventions. All rights reserved. Second class postage paid at Scarsdale, N.Y., and additional 
mailing office. The publishers assume no responsibility for unsolicited material. All stories printed In this 
magazine are fiction and any similarity between characters and actual persona Is coincidental. Printed 
In U.S.A. 



Postmaster— Send Change-of-Address Notice Form 3579 to 720 White Plains Rd. Scarsdale, N.Y. 10583 






Hank Stine 



I’m going to talk about a subject that 
appears to be of interest to a great 
many of you: the writing of science 
fiction. 

Since becoming editor of this mag- 
azine nine months ago, I have read 
approximately five thousand manu- 
scripts: Even allowing for repeat of- 
fenders, that means at least 2,500 
different individuals have submitted 
stories to GALAXY; and 1 imagine 
the monthlies get about twice as 
many contributions, perhaps 
more — which means the total number 
of people attempting to write science 
fiction within any one year must be 
above 6,000 or more! 



I doubt if in any other genera 10% 
of the average magazine’s readership 
is attempting with any seriousness to 
write for it (actually, allowing for 
turnover, it’s possible that up to 50% 
of readership tries at some time). 

Out of this mass of manuscripts, 
the average magazine can print no 
more than about 100, often less, or 
about one out of 100 — however 
professional, name writers can be 
counted on to fill up at least seven 
or eight out of ten of these slots — so 
the number of stories actually pur- 
chased from fledgling writers prob- 
ably comes to no more than 20 or 30: 
This means the odds against actually 
making a sale and breaking into print 
are some 400 to 1 ! 

Allowing for the high attrition rate 
such odds engender, that means the 
average writer can expect to have the 
first hundred stories rejected before 
becoming so good he’s in the top two 
percent and editors just have to buy 
his stuff (I personally know that Larry 
Niven and Steve Perry/Jesse Peel 
wrote a story a week for a year before 
breaking in.) 

If odds like that don’t deter you, 
then you definitely have the kind of 
imagination it takes to become a sci- 
ence-fiction writer! 

— Hank Stine 



4 



GALAXY 





THE INVASION OF AMERICA 



CHAPTER ONE 

"With clear skies expected by tonight. Again, lair all day tomorrow. In 
other news, terrorists have taken over three key buildings in the Wash-” 

Carl Hastings flipped off the radio and parked his Chevy in back of the 
MiniMart. He drained his coffee cup and got out, eyeing the weather while 
the wind whipped his trouser legs as he crossed the cracked concrete to the 
store’s back door. Thunderheads were building in the north like black fists 
against the horizon, a result of the cold front that had snapped down from 
Canada. It would be lousy for business. 

Carl was glad to get inside. He flicked on the lights, wincing at the sudden 
glare, and looked around to see that Adam, the night man, hadn’t screwed 
up any more than usual. The coffee pot had boiled dry, a brown ring scumming 
the bottom, but the floor was swept and even the counter wiped off. Carl set 
another pot to brewing, then glanced through the register receipts. Business 
was already lousy .... 

And unless he stayed open all night like a lot of other stores, it would stay 
lousy. If a couple of months ago he hadn’t suffered that rash of robberies-three 
in as many weeks-he would have stayed open past midnight, but then night 
people were suddenly harder to find. He settled for early closing and lousy 
business. 

Better to open up soon and see if there was any business. He let the old 
radio warm up, set up the nut for the day, closed the register drawer, unlocked 
the front doors, and turned the sign to YES! WE’RE OPEN. The clouds were 
really threatening now; the air smelled full of rain. 

Sound faded in on the radio: . .ling themselves the Third World Lib- 

eration Coalition have occupied local government structures in New York, 
Chicago, Detroit, and Los Angeles as well. At this time it is not known how 
they acquired the nuc-” 

Outside, lightning strafed the sky, followed immediately by a deafening 
thunderclap. The radio died and the lights went out. 

“Damn,” said Carl, and started looking for candles. He usually kept a 
box under the counter but Adam must have moved them. And the flashlight 
wasn’t around either. That meant he’d have to open up a new one, plus 
supply it with batteries, meaning a further reduction in stock. “Damn,” he 
said again. 

Maybe he was just being petty, he thought, fumbling along the aisle for 
the housewares shelf. Maybe he wasn’t cut out for general-store proprietor- 
ship. Maybe .... 

He snorted ruefully. Maybe he needed another cup of coffee. 

He used the flashlight to find the candles, then stood one in its own molten 
wax next to the register. The coffee pot had filled even though the warming 
ring was cold, and the aroma of hot, fresh coffee filled the store. He filled 
up the mug Amy had given him, the one that said To the World’s Greatest 
Husband, and burned his tongue on the first sip. 

About the time it began to rain he realized that the morning’s papers hadn’t 
shown up. Probably the delivery had been held up by the storm, but that 

6 GALAXY 




meant no funnies and no crossword puzzle, and just sitting here by candlelight 
was beginning to bore Carl. It was a great relief when George Wojnekowski 
arrived with his delivery truck. 

“Jeez, the rain’s murder out there,” said George as he walked in, a sheaf 
of manifests in one hand. “Kinda reminds me of my old lady’s mashed 
potatoes,” he said, winking. “If you know what 1 mean.” 

Carl chuckled. George was a balding, pot-bellied little man with a cigar 
stub jammed permanently in his mouth. Carl liked him a lot. “And how is 
Marge?” 

George shrugged. “The same as ever. But she’ll get over it. How’s the 
family?” 

Carl peered at the framed photograph on the wall of a smiling, good-looking 
brunette hugging a somber-faced small boy and girl. “The twins are back 
to hating school. Amy gets more beautiful every year.” He grinned. “About 
the same.” 

“Well, that oughta be an improvement. Look, Carl, I'm dripping all over 
your floor. Do you mind?” 

“Not at all. Mopping up will give me something to do.” 

“Okay, I won’t ask you how’s business.” 

“Thanks. I’m going to go find the mop. Help yourself to some coffee 
while it’s still warm.” When he returned from the storeroom with a mop in 
one hand, a candle in the other, he found George staring sourly at the cover 
of the latest Time magazine. “What’s wrong? Did you expect to see your- 
self?” Carl moved closer. “Or is that you and the light’s too bad to tell?” 

“Aw, I just hate to see these damned Ay-rabs getting all this goody-goody 
publicity while they’re bleeding us white!” 

Carl tried not to let the half-smile build on his face. “You got something 
personal against the Arabs, George?” 

The little man poked his cigar stub at the front doors. The rain beat heavily 
against the glass, distorting the view of George’s truck out front. “It ain’t 
just the outrageous cost of gas to power that thing,” he said emphatically, 
“though a man could go broke trying to keep up with that and what they 
charge a man these days to keep his house warm in the winter. It’s the way 
they’re trying to take over the country, buying banks and controlling stock 
in our giant corporations and setting up their fancy harems out in California 
in those Beverly Hills estates, and all with our money!" He slammed his 
coffee cup down on the counter. “That’s what bums me up. We made them 
rich, gave them millions of our dollars, and now they’ve devalued the dollar 
while trying to buy their way into this country, ’cause the Ay-rabs have so 
much of our money it doesn't matter that the dollar ain’t worth nothing these 
days!” 

Carl reached for a paper towel. “Come on. George, 1 said ‘personal.’ 
That’s a heck of a speech but what’s it got to do with you?” 

George was quiet for a few seconds, then said, “I’m sorry, Carl. It’s been 
about a year since Joe died in the fighting, you know, after the Camp David 
peace accord fell through. 1 guess it gets to me.” 



THE INVASION OF AMERICA 



7 




“George, I’m sorry. Can 1 do anything for you? Get you anything?” 
“Just some more coffee. Listen, I’ll get over it.” His face visibly bright- 
ened. “Hey, let’s get some work done around here. It looks like the rain 
ain’t gonna let up for & while.” 

“Okay, George, what have you got for me this week?” 

“Canned goods,” the little man said, handing Carl the manifests. “You 
want I should start bringing them in?” 

Carl held the manifests up close to the candle. “Just try to stay dry." 
“Very funny.” said George. “Har har.” He turned his jacket collar up 
and prepared to brave the storm, but stopped with his hand on the door. 
“I wonder what the army is doing here?” 

A covered jeep had pulled into the parking lot of the MiniMart. The Jeep 
was painted dark brown and a white star was painted on the door. The rain 
made it too murky to see who was in it or what might be in the back, but 
two men in fatigue uniforms got out of the jeep and ran inside the MiniMart. 

“Now your Dubbayu Dubbayu Two.” George began saying, “that was 
a rea\"shootin' war . .” 

The soldier with the sergeant’s stripes, a tall black man with a stony face, 
positioned himself at the front door with his booted feet apart and his rifle 
at port arms. The other soldier, a short, swarthy man with tight black hair 
and a scar across his left cheek, wore captain’s bars; the name patch above 
his right breast pocket read MONTOYA. 

Montoya looked at Carl, then at George, and a smile puckered the scar on 
his cheek. 

Carl felt a wave of cold fear suddenly rush up his spine. 

Montoya said, “Which one of you gentlemen owns the vehicle parked 
outside?” His voice had a soft foreign-flavored cadence to it that to Carl’s 
ears sounded sinister. 

“I do,” said George. 

Captain Montoya held out his hand. “The keys, please.” 

“What?” 

“Please to give me the keys.” He stared at them in astonishment. “You 
have not heard the radio broadcast about the emergency, telling all citizens 
to give their full support to the armed forces?” 

“As you can see,” said Carl, “we’ve had a power failure.” 

“Ah, yes. The lights.” 

“What emergency?” said George. 

The captain made a deprecating gesture. "Please. Our time is very limited 
and we must hurry. Human lives are at stake. Many human lives. So please 
give me your keys.” 

George slowly shook his head. “Not without some kind of authority,” he 
said flatly. “That truck’s my livelihood. You can’t take that away from me, 
it’s against the Constitution.” 

Montoya unbuttoned the flap of his holster and pulled out an automatic 
pistol. “This is my authority,” he said coldly, and swept the barrel across 
George’s face. The little man went down to the floor. 

8 



GALAXY 




Carl started around the end of the counter but was checked by the black 
sergeant's aiming his rifle. 

The captain bent over George, riffled through his pockets, and straightened 
up holding George’s key ring. He eyed George with distaste, then said to 
Carl, “You had better tell your friend here to cooperate more in the future. 
Or he might not have a future” He turned away and nodded to the sergeant. 

Carl noticed George beginning to stir. Blood oozed from high up the little 
man’s cheekbone. With elaborate casualness Carl said, “What outfit you 
guys with? So I’ll know better next time.” 

The captain turned back. After some hesitation he said, “The Seventh 
Cavalry Division.” 

George was sitting up now, one hand on his head and the other behind 
him. 

Carl’s eyes flicked to the captain’s shoulder patch. 

So did George’s. 

That was when the little man threw the can of spaghetti at Montoya. 

The captain fell back as the sergeant raised his rifle and fired. George was 
flung backwards into a display of potato chips. His arms flailed as he grabbed 
for support, and then he collapsed, bringing the rack down with him. 

“Take anything you want,” Carl said quickly. He stared at his friend while 
his mind whirled, trying to comprehend. He was dimly aware of a sharp 
loudness in the rain’s ceaseless drumming as the two soldiers opened the 
doors and left. When he looked out a moment later, the parking lot was 
empty. 

Blood trickling from the comer of his mouth, George was trying to speak. 
Carl brushed potato chips off him and saw bubbles in the blood welling from 
George’s chest. The bullet had pierced the lung. Carl put his ear to the dying 
man’s lips. 

George’s voice was a whisper. “Not . Seventh Cavalry . yellow 
patch . black stripe . black horse’s head . ...” He coughed. It 
sounded terrible. 

Carl’s eyes felt hot. “Take it easy, old friend,” he said softly. “I’ll get 
help.” 

“Too late . tell Marge ... 1 love her . .” There was no more. 

Carl sat down, blinking in confusion. What the hell was going on? The 
captain’s shoulder patch had been a yellow circle quartered in red and black. 
If George was right (and he must have been right, because seeing the patch 
had made him willing to die), then the two soldiers had to be some kind of 
renegades or escaped convicts or invaders . .And why had they needed 
George’s truck? For the supplies inside? Were there more of them? 

Maybe there really was some kind of emergency! 

The lights flickered once, twice, then came on fully. In the glare George’s 
body looked both pathetic and grotesque, like a wax dummy that might have 
once thought it was human. Its eyes were glassy, but Carl imagined he could 
see accusation in their cold stare. Do something! they seemed to be telling 
him. 



THE INVASION OF AMERICA 



9 




Carl reached for the telephone, read the police number off the emergency 
sheet taped to the register, and while he tapped it, wondered why he had 
been unable to remember it. Was he always this unaware of things around 
him? 

The earpiece beeped its little tune as the swifthes found the right line. The 
other end rang twice. “I’m sorry,” a blurry voice came on to say, “but the 
number you have reached is not in service at this time.” Carl tried it again 
and got the same answer. He called the fire department and let the phone 
ring thirty times before hanging up. 

In the meantime the radio had come back to life. ”... and all government 
business remains virtually at a standstill. White House and Joint Chiefs of 
Staff spokespersons have acknowledged that as yet they know of no defense 
against the Coalition’s demands. Just how the nuclear warheads were brought 
into Washington and a dozen other major U.S. cities is also not known. And 
the number of American communities invaded by Coalition forces has been 
unofficially estimated to be in the thousands. Meanwhile on Wall Street panic 
ensued as . .” 

As soon as the news sank in, Carl called Amy. She answered on the third 
ring. 

“Amy? This is Carl.” 

“Then you heard what happened. Isn’t it awful?” 

“Yes.” 

“Oh, Carl, what are we going to do?” 

“Listen to me carefully. Did the kids go to school yet?” 

“No, the rain was so bad I thought I’d get Peggy to take them when she 
drove her kids over, but then when 1 heard the radio announcement . 

“Good, honey, good. Look. Pack all the warm clothes you can into that 
old steamer trunk of your grandmother’s. I’ll be home to get you and the 
kids as soon as I can.” 

“To get us? Carl, where are we going?” 

“I-I don’t know yet. Out of town. Somewhere.” 

“Is it that dangerous?” 

“Two of them were in here just a little while ago. They shot George 
Wojnekowski and took his delivery truck.” 

“Oh, no! Not George! Does Marge know?” 

“Not yet. Honey, would you call and tell her? I know you really should 
go over there, but ...” 

“I understand, Carl. I’ll do it.” 

“Thanks.” 

“And Carl?” 

“Yeah?” 

“I love you.” 

“I love you too. See you soon.” He hung up and realized he felt no easier. 
Now he had to hurry. He hauled an empty carton from the back and began 
throwing into it canned foods, lots of paper towels and napkins, flashlight 
batteries, powdered milk, canned drinks of all kinds, a sheaf of comic books 

10 



GALAXY 




to keep the twins busy, paperbacks and magazines tor Amy, Band Aids, 
aspirin, instant coffee, sugar, anything and everything that had a long shelf 
life and didn’t need much preparation. After a while stumbling over George's 
corpse began to make him sick so he dragged it behind the counter. 

The cartons-there were three of them by now-were each heavier than he’d 
thought. He propped the back door open and was halfway out with the first 
carton when he saw that the rain was too heavy to do it this way. He lowered 
the carton to the floor and cursed at himself for his stupidity. He was wasting 
valuable time. 

So he did what he should have done in the first place: parked the Chevy 
as close to the store as possible and then left the trunk and rear doors wide 
open. He filled the trunk and half the back seat with cartons. Amy’s grand- 
mother’s trunk would take up the rest of the back seat, and the kids could 
ride up front with him and Amy. 

Was he really ready to go now? Carl took a last quick look around the 
MiniMart. The shelves were a mess, some emptied, some with their contents 
spilled onto the floor; it looked like someone was in a hurry to leave. It 
looked like the end of something. 

Carl emptied out the cash register. Ready cash might or might not prove 
useful where they were going (and where were they going?), but he couldn’t 
see leaving it behind for the looters. There were bound to be looters. 

As a farewell gesture he propped George’s body up behind the counter, 
listening to a radio that had begun to repeat itself because no more news was 
coming in. He decided to leave the lights on and the doors unlocked. Even 
looters had to eat. 

“Goodbye, old friend,” he said softly, and went out the back way. 

CHAPTER TWO 

Driving along the old Taylor road was a mistake. At first it seemed a good 
idea, an impulse bom of fear and haste. Avoid Main Street with its traffic, 
its visibility, its probable invading soldiers. Take Taylor where it paralleled 
Main for most of its length, then down Reservoir and home. But the blacktop 
had thinned and potholes played hell with the Chevy’s suspension. The storm 
was unleashing the last of its fury now, the rain beating so hard against the 
windshield that the wipers were useless. It was like driving underwater. The 
headlights barely pierced the murk. 

Working the pedals was giving him a charley horse; his back ached from 
too rigid a posture; his knuckles were white where he gripped the steering 
wheel. Carl didn’t notice how tense he was. His thoughts kept flashing back 
to poor dead George, lying there drowned in his own blood. 

Up ahead, Carl remembered, was the old Zachary Taylor High School. 
Condemned years ago for demolition, it would make an ideal hiding place, 
if ever he needed one. Might be worth checking out even now .... 

Lightning struck somewhere behind him. The school stood out in sharp 
relief for just an instant before it faded: the two-storied main building, at 
one end the auditorium (where Carl’s class had graduated so long ago), at 



THE INVASION OF AMERICA 



11 




the other end the gymnasium (where Carl had taken Amy tor the Senior 
Prom), off to the side the athletic field. Where the near goalpost used to be 
was a tank. An Army tank. 

Carl reacted without thinking. He spun the wheel around hard, fishtailing 
the car until it pointed in the direction he came from. He floored the gas 
pedal. Tires squealing, the car jumped forward. Racing over the broken 
blacktop, heedless of the potholes that shook him and jarred him and blurred 
his vision, he didn’t begin to feel anywhere near safe until he topped a slight 
rise. As he checked the mirror for signs of pursuit-there were none-he heard 
a horn blare, snapped his eyes front and saw a truck bearing down on him 
at high speed, headlight on hi-beam. 

Carl threw the wheel to the right. The truck, a half-ton pickup, whipped 
past him, the horn dopplering down. The Chevy rocked onto the shoulder, 
did not respond when Carl turned the wheel back, and ploughed into the * 
roadside ditch. There was a muffled whump and the car lurched to a stop. 

Carl felt acutely aware of his own mortality More than George’s death, 
more than potholes in the road, this had jarred him into accepting reality. He 
took a couple of deep breaths, feeling his heart pound, and unlocked his 
hands from the steering wheel. He was shaken up but alive, and after a while 
he managed to shove the door open and get out of the car. 

The first thing he noticed was that the rain had stopped Ahead of him the 
sky was still awash in storm clouds, but here the air smelled damp and clean, 
with a strange tranquility about it. His senses were amplified. Each drop of 
water on the car was a beaded jewel, every leaf on the roadside bush was 
vibrantly green. He heard the truck on the other side of the rise shift gears 
and turn. 

Carl walked around to the front of the car and was aware of every particle 
of dirt that crunched under his shoes. He realized with transcendent clarity 
that the Chevy was no longer driveable. The right tire had exploded upon 
impact with the ditch, the bumper twisting up under the wheel well' and right 
against the hub. The headlight had of course shattered. “Shit,” said Carl 
and started kicking at the other headlight. 

Over the rise came the pickup truck. It came to a stop beside the Chevy 
and a big beefy man in a blue jump suit exactly the same shade as the truck 
got out. ‘‘That was some close call.” said the man. “You okay?” 

“I’ll live,” said Carl. “I wish I could say the same for my car.” 

The man circled past Carl to inspect the damage. “I got a towline if you 
want to pull it back onto the road,” he said. “A few days in the shop should 
fix it up okay.” 

Carl shook his head. “I don’t have that much time.” 

The man peered into the back seat of the Chevy. “You running to or from 
something?” he asked, eyeing Carl shrewdly. He extended his hand. “The 
name’s Wheeler. Rufus T. Wheeler.” 

“Carl Hastings.” He did not shake Wheeler’s hand. There was something 
about the man he didn’t trust, something he couldn’t quite put his finger on. 

Wheeler let his hand drop. “That’s okay. You don’t have to be friendly. 

12 GALAXY 




I mean, you never know just who you might meet these days.” The man had 
an easy manner and an easier grin. “You want a lift back into town?” 

Carl looked at Wheeler’s pickup truck. There was a windshield decal on 
the driver’s side, a decal of a yellow circle quartered in red and black. “1 
hate to leave my stuff behind.” 

“Bring it along. We can put it under the tarp in the back.” 

What was Wheeler’s game? wondered Carl, suppressing his revulsion as 
they transferred the cartons from the Chevy. Maybe he'd better take some 
precautions. “Forgot something,” he said as Wheeler climbed into the cab. 
“Okay. I’m going to turn it around.” 

Carl pulled the jack handle from the Chevy while Wheeler made the U. 
He got in holding it against his leg, hoping that Wheeler wouldn’t notice. 
The pickup had a shotgun hanging on a rack in the rear window. Carl felt 
foolish holding the jack handle. 

“Guess you’ve been listening to the radio," said Wheeler as they started 
off. “You afraid of these , . Coalition people?” 

“Aren't you?” 

“Naw, I get along good with everybody.” 

“Even with . .?” 

“Sure. A man’s got to adapt himself to changing times.” 

Carl let that one pass for the moment. He stared out of the window at 
fences and trees flashing by. “This isn’t the way back into town.” They were 
turning onto a side road. 

“Sure it is,” said Wheeler. “This is a shortcut.” 

The “shortcut” would take them back behind the school. “No, it’s not,” 
said Carl. “You’re lying.” 

“I thought we’d go see some friends of mine first. You know too much.” 
“What are you, a collaborator?” 

Wheeler laughed. It was not a pleasant sound. “I’m an agent, Hastings. 
And you may as well put that tire iron or whatever it is down. At this range 
I can’t miss.” His left hand appeared to have grown a gun, aimed at Carl. 
“Drop it. Out the window so 1 can see it.” 

Carl brought the jack handle up slowly. He held it at eye level with his 
left hand while his right rolled down the window. Fresh, cool air washed his 
face. This was it, now or never. He jabbed the jack handle left and down, 
all the while furiously grappling for the gun. The jack handle caught Wheeler 
across the face, breaking his nose. Blood gushed. The truck rolled on. 

The men faced each other now, opposite hands at the gun. Despite 
Wheeler’s advantage of size and strength, concentrating on the driving was 
beginning to exact its toll. Carl hit him again and again. As Wheeler’s strength 
weakened, the gun twisted up and up, and then it was out of his hand and 
Carl had it. But Wheeler was unconscious or dead. 

Carl grabbed the wheel as the truck began to slow. He couldn’t reach the 
brake pedal so he did the next best thing: He turned off the ignition. The 
truck coasted to a stop. 

It took him longer to recover this time, he was shaking so. Then he got 
THE INVASION OF AMERICA 13 




disgusted and couldn’t bear to look at Wheeler any longer. He leaned across 
the man, opened the door and, not caring if Wheeler was alive or dead, 
shoved him out. Wheeler landed on his shoulder, flopped onto his back and 
lay still. 

Carl started the engine and leaned out of the window. "I appreciate your 
offer, Mr. Wheeler.” he called, “but I prefer to go it alone. Thanks for the 
use of your truck.” 



CHAPTER THREE 

Carl parked the blue pickup in the middle of the garage and pulled the 
door down and shut after it. Getting from where he’d dumped Wheeler to 
here-home-had been almost foolishly easy. An enemy patrol in a jeep had 
passed him on Main Street without incident, had in fact signaled to him as 
he went by, and Carl had figured out why. The windshield decal that had 
alerted him to Wheeler was his ticket to a safe passage. 

He was standing in the darkness of the garage still thinking these thoughts 
when the door from the kitchen burst open and Amy rushed into his arms. 
“Oh, Carl, I was so worried!” she cried. “It seemed like hours since you 
called, and 1 was so afraid that-that-" She hugged him tight, tighter. 

“For a while I was afraid 1 wouldn’t make it either,” Carl murmured, 
stroking her hair softly, so glad to be back in her arms. The light spilling 
from the kitchen highlighted the red in her rich dark hair. Amy smelled so 
clean and fresh, of shampoo and perfume and . cookies? 

He held her at arm's length. “You’ve been baking!" 

“Mm-hm.” She gave him a kiss. “I'm about to start another batch. Notice 
the apron?” She pirouetted. “The wooden spoon smearing cookie dough on 
your shirt?” 

“I notice,” he said, eyeing her appreciatively. “But I think it was your 
perfume that gave me the first clue.” 

“My perfume?” 

“Eau de chocolate chip.” He grinned as Amy laughed. “The kids inside?” 

She nodded. “That’s why I'm making cookies. Carl, what happened to 
the car? And where did you get that pickup truck?” 

“Let’s go inside and I’ll tell you.” 

Arm in arm they entered the kitchen, stopping every few steps to reassure 
themselves of each other’s presence with hugs and kisses. The kitchen was 
warm and homey, full of the aroma of fresh baking, an oasis of comfortable 
domesticity amid the bizarre happenings of Carl’s day thus far. He sat at the 
table, fingering the wood-grained formica surface with renewed delight. It 
was so good to be home! 

“Want some coffee?” 

“Please. I feel like I’ve been dragged through a pond.” 

“You look it too. I’ll get you a cup as soon as 1 finish mixing this dough.” 

Carl planted his elbows on the table and rested his chin in cupped hands. 
Watching Army was a delight, too. She was so pretty and vivacious, even 
wearing a mundane costume of blue jeans and a plaid shirt, even doing 

>4 - GALAXY 




something as mundane as stirring cookie dough. After two kids and eight 
years of marriage, her figure was still as girlish in her tight clothes as when 
they first met. He found the interplay of muscles in her butt and the backs 
of her legs deeply moving and more exciting with every passing year. He 
rose and crossed to her, putting his arms around her waist from behind and 
nuzzling her neck. 

“You couldn’t wait for your coffee? It's in the pot on the stove." 

He kissed the mole under her left ear. “I had something else in mind.” 
“I’ll just bet you did.” She let go of the spoon as his tongue traced the 
shell of her ear. “Mmm. You ought to stop that.” 

“I can’t help it. It must be the chocolate chips. They drive me wild with 
desire.” 

“You animal. Stop it.” She made a determined effort to resume the mixing. 
“What is it about getting grimy that gives some men sex on the brain?” 
Between nibbles on her earlobe Carl said, “Come upstairs and I’ll show 
you.” 

Amy turned with mock anger. “Can’t you take a hint ? Not until you have 
some coffee, not until you take a shower, not until I finish making these 
cookies, and most definitely not until you tell me what happened!” 

“Promise?” riposted Carl, retreating to the table when Amy threatened 
him with the spoon. She brought him coffee a few minutes later and sat 
opposite, staring at him with mute expectance. 

“I don’t want the kids to hear it,” she said, “and they can’t play upstairs 
forever, so you’d better tell me fast.” 

Carl briefly related the story of the two soldiers in the MiniMart. Amy 
gasped when he told her how George died, and put her hand on top of his 
when he described his flight and seeing the tank out at the old school. And 
when he recounted the affair of Wheeler, color spotted her cheeks and her 
eyes opened wide in horror. “What an awful man,” she said. “Carl, he 
could have killed you!” 

“He would have, given the chance,” Carl agreed. “1 was lucky to get 
away from him.” 

“Maybe it wasn’t only luck.” 

“What? You mean Fate?” 

“Why not? You said yourself that you got past the soldiers by using his 
truck. And since we have to get out of here . .” 

", . we’ll do it in the truck,” Carl finished. “I already thought of that. 
That’s why I haven’t been in such a hurry to leave right away.” He glanced 
up at the wall clock above the door to the garage. It was already after twelve. 
“But time is moving on. I’m going to go upstairs and take a shower.” 
There was the smallest of burning smells. “Oh, no!" cried Amy. “My 
cookies!” 

Halfway up the stairs Carl was ambushed by a pair of giggling 
seven-year-olds. “Cheryl! Jimmy!” he called to them as Jimmy wrapped 
his small arms around Carl’s left leg and Cheryl tried to climb onto his 
shoulders. Carl managed to bull his way upstairs, half-carrying Cheryl, 



THE INVASION OF AMERICA 



15 




half-dragging Jimmy. He deposited them carefully on the landing and tried 
to look sternly at them. But they were so cute! Jimmy had his Darth Vader 
t-shirt on backward and Cheryl had managed to smear chocolate chips all 
over C3PO on the front of her t-shirt. 

“Daddy. I didn’t have to go to school today.” Cheryl announced. 

“Me too.” said Jimmy. “And I wasn't scared by the thunder and lightning 
either.” 

“Was too!” declared Cheryl. 

“Was not!" 

“Was too!” 

“Knock it off, you two,” Carl chided them gently. “Did you finish your 
cookies?” 

“Uh-huh.” “Uh-huh.” 

“Want some more?” 

“Yeah!” they chorused. And before Carl could say any more, they marched 
down the stairs chanting “Cookies! Cookies!” as their battle cry. Carl listened 
to their voices fading down into the kitchen and chuckled to himself. They 
were great kids. He was the luckiest man alive. 

Ten minutes of hot shower left him feeling refreshed and renewed, ready 
to face whatever emergencies or horrors lay in store. He took his time getting 
dressed, selecting denim pants and a turtle-neck knit, thick socks and rul> 
ber-soled shoes. With his windbreaker over the shirt he would be comfortably 
warm yet able to move easily. He checked himself out in the mirror and was 
thoroughly satisfied with what he saw. Better and better, he thought. Now 
he could handle anything. 

But as he sat on the bed to tighten his shoelaces, a wave of ineffable 
sadness came over him. Leaving this house with its memories, its embodiment 
of all their hopes and wishes and dreams, was going to be painful after all. 
And so much was left undone! A treehouse for the kids in the backyard. A 
rec room in the basement. Wood paneling in the den. All postponed} or 
abandoned now . - 

The sadness passed. It would hurt to leave the house-: yes. but it was a 
distant hurt now, remote until summoned by the mind, tike a lost parent’s 
love ;■ : 

Carl went into the bathroom. and scrubbed his face vigorously. No more- 
of this sentimental nonsense! be chastised himself, then made his way down : 
the stairs, ... 

Cheryl was the first to see him when he poked his head around die kitchen. - 
doorway. She was picking chocolate chips out of a cookie with her fingernail 
and staring intently at it before sucking the chocolate off, but when she 
noticed him, she grinned mischievously and shoved the entire cookie into 
her mouth. 

Carl laughed. He sat at the table with her, gaping at her pop-eyed while 
she unchipped another cookie and presented it gravely to him. 

“Oh, Carl, don’t encourage her. It’s disgusting.” Amy was at the sink, 
washing dishes. 

16 



GALAXY 




Carl turned to her with the same pop-eyed expression and calmly stuffed 
the cookie into his mouth. Jimmy giggled with his own mouth full and began 
to choke. Carl pounded him on the back. 

Amy couldn’t help but laugh. "You're terrible." she told him and Carl 
agreed with her. "By the way," she added as Carl advanced toward her with 
a cookie in each hand, "a sound truck came by while you were in the 
shower.” She hastily wiped her hands dry and retreated with the damp dish 
towel held in front of her as protection. 

Carl relaxed. "What was it about?" 

"It said there would be a telecast at one o’clock and that everybody had 
to watch it.” 

“It’s nearly one now." 

"I'll go turn on the tv,” said Jimmy. 

"Me too,” said Cheryl. They scampered into the living room. 

As soon as they were gone, Carl leaned forward. “I forgot to ask you 
earlier,” he said, his voice low. "Have you called Marge yet to tell her about 
George?” 

Amy nodded. “Right after you called me this morning. And then after you 
told me how it happened 1 phoned her again, just a little while ago.” 

“How did she take it?” 

“She didn’t know who I was the first time and couldn’t understand why 
I was calling. It wasn’t easy getting it through to her.” 

Carl nodded to show that he understood. He and Amy had socialized with 
the Wqjnekowskis only a couple of times before discovering that the wives 
had nothing in common. 

"I really couldn’t do anything for her,” Amy continued, "except to say 
that I was sorry. She seemed to be in shock. 1 guess it’s really been hard on 
her, George dying so soon after their son Joe.” 

“And the second time?” 

Amy frowned. "She knew who ! was right away but I don't think she 
heard me. i had to repeat everything. She sounded like she’d been drinking 
or had taken tranquilizers . When I told her how George had said he loved 
-$efidght.%dfoi^'4ej9ied,' she smarted crying. ” Amy’s eyes were filled with 
tears. “®h, Carl;’’ she pleaded, “couldn’t we take her with us?” 

"1 wish: we could "/honey,” he said softly, 
"but there’s no Way. We just don’t have the room.” He let her sob against 
him for a while-, then lifted herchin and kissed away her tears. “Come on, ’ ’ 
he said, "let’s go watch that telecast.” : x 

Cheryl and Jimmy sssh&d them as they entered the hying room. A familiar 
symbol filled the screen: a yellow circle quartered in red and black. The 
symbol stayed as, offscreen, a crisp voice in the precise enunciations of an 
English accent spoke. "This is your Provisional Government speaking. At 
eleven fifteen this morning. Eastern Standard Time, the President of the 
United States ceded executive control of Congress and the Armed Forces to 
leaders of the Third World Liberation Coalition, shortly after Coalition forces 
liberated the capital city from the oppressive yoke of American capitalism. 

THE INVASION OF AMERICA 



17 




“Effective immediately the following emergency measures will be in force. 
A curfew from si;; p.m. to si;; a.m. will be strictly observed. All radio, 
television, and newspaper activity will be suspended until the proper cen- 
sorship boards can be established. All schools will be closed. All banks will 
be closed. All gasoline will be rationed. All travel outside community borders 
is restricted to those with permits. All weapons are prohibited, Gatherings 
of more than five persons, e;;cept for the purposes of worship, is forbidden. 
Violators will be shot.” 

Carl emitted a low whistle. Amy clutched his hand for comfort and signaled 
the kids to join them. 

“These emergency measures,” the voice went on smoothly, “are of course 
only temporary. It will take your new government a few days to round up 
the traitors and profitmongers who have too long benefited at the expense 
of the American people. These few days will be hard on all of us. But we 
ask that all loyal Americans accept without question the authority of the 
Coalition’s local directors who will soon make themselves known to you. 
We ask that you assist them in all possible ways so as to effect a smooth 
transition to a government that is truly of the people, by the people, and for 
the people. 

“For too long have the American people allowed themselves to be bullied 
by Big Business and its influence over the late administration. Giant cor- 
porations pay no ta;;es while government services for middle- and lower-income 
classes flounder for lack of funds. Unions conspire with government trade 
restrictions to force prices higher, thus ensuring through inflation that only 
the very rich can afford a decent standard of living. Special business mon- 
opolies accrue enormous profits through federal regulation of alcohol and 
tobacco while encouraging the rise of organized crime through unreasonable 
drug prohibition. 

“These and other injustices must cease. 

“Over the ne;;t few months your new government will introduce significant 
reforms. Immediate priorities are food and housing, to be followed by lower 
gasoline prices and the abolition of the 55 m.p.h. speed limit. Later reforms 
will include among others the legalization of marijuana, the elimination of 
se;;ual discrimination on all levels, the reinstatement of capital punishment, 
free abortions, and unrestricted foreign trade. 

“We call on every American citizen to join us in the glorious struggle for 
a new birth of freedom, when government will truly be ‘from each according 
to his abilities, to each according to his needs.’ 

“This broadcast will repeat every hour until curfew.” 

The only picture during the entire broadcast had been the Coalition symbol. 
Now it faded to black and snow filled the screen. Carl got up and turned the 
television off. 

“Hey,” said Jimmy, “I wanna watch cartoons.” 

“Me too,” said Cheryl. 

“Cartoons aren’t on now,” Amy said in a small voice. “Why don’t you 
go upstairs to your room and play?” 

18 



GALAXY 




“I wanna watch tv,” said Cheryl. 

“Me too,” said Jimmy. 

“You heard your mother,” Carl snapped, then relented when their little 
faces showed fright. “Go on now. I’ll bring you up some comic books in 
a few minutes.” He looked back at Amy sitting on the couch. She looked 
frightened too. and clutched at him as he returned to her. 

“Do you think they really mean it?” Her voice had lost all of its lower 
tones and came out a whisper. 

“That curfew business? Oh, I’m sure of it. We can’t do anything now 
without their approval.” 

“What about the other stuff? Those reforms?” 

Carl laughed bitterly. “Fancy talk. Carrots to dangle in front of every 
half-baked liberal in the country. A little something for everybody. That 
little touch about the speed limit was a beauty.” 

“Then you really do want to leave?” 

“You don’t?” She looked uncertain. “Amy, my love, don’t believe every- 
thing you hear on television. There’s about as much chance of those reforms 
happening as there is of the emergency measures being temporary. Don’t you 
see that we have to get out while we still can?” 

“You mean the truck.” 

“Yes. It’s the only passport to freedom we’ve got. Why not use it?” 

“I guess I just hate to give all this up,” she said ruefully. “The house, 
the store. Everything we’ve worked for.” 

“They’ll make us give it all up anyway. The Third World Liberation 
Coalition, whatever that is.” He held her by the shoulders and looked full 
into her face. 

A minute passed. Her eyes dropped. “Okay,” she said at last in a voice 
so tiny he could barely hear her. “Okay. We’ll leave.” 

“I’ll go get the kids their comics. Are you about done packing?” 

Her face seemed to grow more gaunt with every passing second, the skin 
stretched tight over her cheekbones. “The trunk’s upstairs on the landing. 
I laid out a fresh change of clothes for the kids on their beds. ” Her eyes bore 
pain and resignation. “I'm scared, Carl. I’m really scared.” 

Carl drew her to him but she was wooden in his arms. “Me too,” he said 
tenderly. “Me too.” 

She did not give him the small smile he expected. 

CHAPTER FOUR 

The journey through town was eerily quiet. The pickup truck glided 
smoothly over the glistening residential streets, silent but for the hiss of tires 
on pavement. No one was about, though front curtains shifted in the windows 
of the houses as the truck passed by. 

The tension in the cab was almost electric, a high-voltage mood that issued 
from Amy and transformed even the kids’ normally high spirits into gloom. 
The comic books sat in their laps, unopened and unread. Their faces were 
sullen and unhappy, and Carl wished it could be otherwise. 

THE INVASION OF AMERICA 



19 




Sound faded in as they approached Main Street: the crackle of distant 
gunfire, far-off pounding. In the west a long column of black smoke and 
white smoke, intertwined, curled up into the sky. Carl turned the truck onto 
Main and reluctantly headed toward the smoke. This section of downtown 
was beginning to look like a battle zone, an impression confirmed when they 
passed the fire station. The doors were wide open, the fire trucks gone, on 
the floor at the back what looked like bodies in uniform. 

Amy gasped and tried to cover the children’s faces with her hands. 
“Mommy,” whined Cheryl, “you’re hurting me!” 

“Sorry, sweetie. 1 just didn’t want you to see.” 

“I saw!” declared Jimmy. “1 saw dead people.” 

“I wanna see too!” said Cheryl. 

“Hush, now,” said Carl. “You’re upsetting your mother.” But he was 
glad for the sound of voices; it helped ease the tension. And now the children 
became more animated, pointing out to each other the closed storefronts and 
deserted gas stations. Here was a liquor store with its front window smashed, 
broken glass and what was left of a “Burgie” sign littering the sidewalk. 
There, across the street, two clothing store mannequins had collapsed against 
each other, feigning death. 

Up ahead there were some soldiers, heading their way. 

Carl’s first impulse was to panic. Run them down or blow them all to hell 
with the shotgun. Stomp on the gas and race out of there before retribution 
followed. And then common sense prevailed. Wait and see. Hide if need be, 
do what you can to protect the kids and Amy, but wait and see. 

He swung the pickup into the ne;:t alley on the right and parked. He 
adjusted the side and rearview mirrors, then slumped in his seat and waited. 
In the mirrors his vista was of the mouth of the alley, the street, on the other 
side a shoe store and a Walgreen’s. 

After a time the soldiers came into view. There were four of them, of 
assorted ages and sizes: woolly-haired and black-skinned; dark-skinned, 
dark-eyed, straight jet-black hair; short, sallow-skinned, with features of an 
Oriental cast; olive-skinned and turbaned. 

They looked like no army Carl had ever seen. 

Prowling up Main Street, seeking (probably) resistors, they crouched and 
ran, swaggered and strode, alternately playing predator and prey. One of 
them, the short one with the almond eyes, glanced incuriously into the alley 
before moving on. 

Everything would have been fine if Cheryl hadn’t chosen that moment to 
sit up and turn around. 

Carl yanked her down but it was too late. The Oriental came creeping 
forward, his rifle at port arms, ready to swing it down and fire. Carl cursed 
silently to himself and got out of the pickup with his arms held straight up, 
though not before telling Amy to take over the wheel and go when he said 
Go. The soldier gestured with his rifle. Carl waggled his arms to show that 
they were already raised as high as he could get them and crab-walked slowly 
to the side of the alley, the soldier’s eyes following. 

20 



GALAXY 




The pickup started with a muffled roar and the soldier’s gaze shifted, his 
eyebrows lowering in suspicion. He half-tumed his head and barked a mon- 
osyllable over his shoulder, and at that instant Carl shouted “Go!” The 
pickup took off with a squeal of tires and an acrid cloud of e;;haust fumes. 
Carl watched it go while the soldier stood dumbfounded, then turned to face 
the soldier with a sheepish grin. The soldier glowered. 

Into the alley at a sprint came the other three. The tallest of them, the 
black, conferred with the Oriental in what sounded to Carl like French, while 
the other two fired futilely at the rapidly receding truck. The truck turned a 
corner and was gone. 

The black turned to Carl. He was a head taller than Carl, and his eyes 
commanded Carl to look up into them until the gaze burned and Carl was 
forced to look away . He dropped his head and found himself staring at the 
black soldier’s name patch: NKELE. Nkele extended his rifle and lifted Carl’s 
chin up by the tip of the barrel. “Qui etes-vous?” he demanded. 

“What?” said Carl. “I don’t speak-” 

The rifle tip slid along his jawline and pressed against his neck. “Comment 
vous appellez-vous?” 

That one he remembered from one semester of high-school French a thou- 
sand years ago. “Carl Hastings.” And as soon as he said it, he swore under 
his breath. Why hadn’t he used his brains a bit and said “Rufus T. Wheeler” 
instead? 

“Carl Hastings?” repeated Nkele to the others. They shook their heads. 
Nkele unbuttoned his blouse and pulled out a wrinkled and much-folded 
sheet of paper, which he scanned twice before putting it back. “Carl Has- 
tings,” he said again, this time with an obvious distaste. 

Carl felt his knees turning into jelly. 

Something exploded close by on Main Street. Nkele’s head whipped up. 
He stayed the others with his hand, looked back at Carl. “Cet homme n’est 
pas un agent en secret,” he said to the Oriental soldier. “Vous tuez lui.” 
Then he and the others dashed out of the alley, leaving the Oriental to face 
Carl alone. 

That was no problem for the soldier. Carl was unarmed. 

The soldier stepped back and aimed his rifle at Carl’s chest. 

Carl closed his eyes and waited for the end. His fervent hope was that Amy 
and the children had gotten away somewhere safe. 

There was another nearby explosion and then the sharp crack of a shot. 

Carl’s knees folded. He slid down the wall to rest in a shallow puddle. 

“Hey, man! You ain’t dead yet! Open your eyes!” 

Carl opened his eyes. A few feet away lay the soldier, the center of a red 
puddle. 

“That’s right!” came the voice again, cheerfully. “He’s the one who’s 
dead, not you.” 

Carl didn’t believe it. “I don’t believe it,” he said aloud. 

“Sure, don’t take my word for it,” the voice said calmly. “Check it out 
for yourself. And start with yourself. Any wounds, bleeding, pain, bullet 

THE INVASION OF AMERICA 



21 




holes, anything like that?" 

Carl examined himself carefully. "No,” he admitted after a while. 

“You see. I told you. Now check the dearly departed.” 

Carl crawled forward. The soldier was dead, there was no doubt about 
that. He stared upward with sightless eyes while a sticky pool of crimson 
expanded from the middle of his back. In death he looked younger. 

“Well?” the voice persisted. “Am 1 right or am 1 right?” 

"You're right,” said Carl. “He’s dead and I'm alive. Who the hell am 
1 talking to?” 

“Could be I’m your guardian angel. Look up. Higher. Higher than that.” 

Up at the roof edge, outlined by a nimbus of cloud-washed sky, a dark 
face grinned back at him. One arm was lifted and it waved at him. 

Carl waved back. “But who are you?” 

“Come on up and I’ll tell you. You’ll find a door about halfway up the 
alley on this side. If it’s not open, use that dead guy’s rifle to shoot the lock. 
Anyway, bring his rifle with you. And check his body for ammo, too.” Then 
the face disappeared. 

The door was sealed with a rusty padlock. Carl blew the lock off with a 
rifle burst and yanked at the handle. Hinges screamed as the door slowly 
opened. Inside it was a windowless and lightless corridor, dimly lit by daylight 
leaked in from the alley. Suppressing his apprehensions. Carl went in. 

He had gone only a few steps when an outside clamor convinced him to 
pull the door shut from the inside. Now the darkness was virtually total. 
Holding the rifle out and down like a blindman’s cane, Carl moved gingerly 
forward. He could see nothing. He brushed the left wall with his fingertips, 
encountering varied textures of smooth plaster, wooden molding, door panels 
and the like. And the farther in he went, the less sound he heard, until at last 
only the soft sigh of his feet shuffling in the thick dust reached his ears. He 
felt utterly isolated. 

Soon he no longer had even a left wall to guide him, as the surface under 
his fingertips fell away. The rifle barrel ran aground with a chunk. Carl eased 
forward until he touched the wall directly ahead of him. Okay, which way 
to go? Right or left? He turned right, moving on as before: rifle extended, 
left hand trailing the wall. But after a few steps he came to a dead end. He 
stopped, turned around, began heading back, and then his hand brushed a 
string or a wire, and something fell on him. 

It had weight, but of a temporary kind. Its initial impact felled him but 
could not hold him down, for there was nothing there. It seemed to have 
spread itself over his head and shoulders, clotting in his hair and at the back 
of his neck where the sweat had been. He shifted to his knees, reached up 
to take a handful of the stuff even as it fell off his shoulders and recognized 
it as some kind of powder: dust or plaster or flour. He brushed it off his face 
and then he laughed without knowing why. He groped around for the rifle, 
found it and continued on his way. 

An empty sensation under his fingers told him when he passed the corridor 
leading back to the door and the alley. Almost immediately his toes were 

22 GALAXY 




touching the bottom riser of what the rifle told him was a flight of stairs. He 
started up. 

The stairway was steep and narrow and there was no banister to hang onto. 
He placed his hand flat against the wall and took his time climbing. As he 
rose, step by weary step, his sense of isolation increased until it seemed he 
was all there was in the universe, just him and the stairs which he had to 
climb endlessly and forever. He sloughed off thoughts of Amy, good wife 
and true, and Cheryl and Jimmy, the greatest of kids, and the MiniMart and 
George Wojnekowski, both now lost to the present and the future, and what 
the hell was it all about, anyway? Why had this happened, and that and that? 
What was happening to the country? And why was he doing this? 

Only after he had-at last!-come to the top of the stairs and had seen the 
thin crack of light that denoted a door, and pushed through it into daylight, 
did he begin to understand. He was here because someone had told him to 
be here. And what had happened had happened. 

These were not answers. But they were better than constantly asking himself 
questions for which there were no answers. 

“Man, I thought you’d never get here,” said a voice as he emerged. “But 
keep it cool coz we got company.” 

Carl realized the voice had been whispering. It had only seemed loud in 
comparison to the silence he had just ascended through. He walked out onto 
the rooftop and stood staring for a while. From where the black smoke still 
rose in the west, he could see orange flames and an occasional fireball shoot 
up from the roof and gutted windows of the city hall. He stepped out to get 
a closer look when a hand yanked him down. 

It was the black man. “You want to get killed?” he whispered fiercely. 
“If you gotta take a look, crawl on your belly over here and catch what’s 
goin’ down.” 

Carl followed the black man’s example and slid over to the roof edge. 
Cautiously he looked down onto Main Street. 

There were bodies down there, sprawled on the pavement. Bodies he 
recognized as being the soldiers he’d confronted in the alley. Other soldiers 
too were there, live soldiers, four as before. They surrounded a blue pickup 
truck. 

God bless her, she’d come back for him. It was a useless gesture but a 
noble one, and it spelled doom for her and the kids. In that moment he felt 
a love for her so fervent that it spilled out of his eyes and ran down his 
cheeks. 

“Your wife, huh?” said the black man beside him. 

Unable to find his voice. Carl nodded. 

Apparently the patrol had just stopped the truck, though Carl wondered 
if that clamor he had heard just after entering the building had something to 
do with what he now saw below him. As he watched, a soldier jerked open 
the door on the driver’s side and dragged Amy out; she bit and kicked until 
the soldier hit her. and then the fight seemed to go out of her. Other soldiers 
took the children out. Cheryl clung defiantly to her comic books and Jimmy 

THE INVASION OF AMERICA 23 




began to cry. 

One soldier who had stood quietly by and watched all this now strode 
forward, regarded Amy in silence for a moment and then smacked her full 
across the face. The sound of the slap was sharp and clear, and made the 
hairs at the back of Carl’s neck bristle with anger. Then the soldier spoke, 
in a contralto with a heavy German accent. “Where did you get this pickup 
truck?” 

Amy stared at her blankly. 

“The owner of this truck was found a few hours ago on the other side of 
town. He had been badly beaten. 1 ask you again, where did you get this 
truck?” At no time did she raise her voice above a matter-of-fact tone. 

When Amy made no reply again, the woman signaled to the soldier holding 
Jimmy. The soldier twisted Jimmy’s arm up behind his back and Jimmy let 
out with a shrill scream that had Carl trying to rise to his feet, except that 
the man beside him knocked him down and held his hand firmly pressed over 
Carl’s mouth. 

“You want us all to die?” he demanded. “There’s nothing you can do 
right now. Nothing! They got your family and they’re gonna mess with them, 
but unless you decide to play hero, they got a good chance of staying alive. 
You understand what I’m saying?” Carl nodded assent and the man let him 
up. “Now we watch and we listen,” he continued in his whisper, “and we 
wait.” 

“I told you I don’t know,” Amy was saying between what sounded like 
sobs. “My husband, he . .” Her voice trailed off. 

Carl looked over the roof edge. Now both children were crying as well, 
but Amy appeared defiant, as if she would be bullied no longer. But what 
if they hurt the kids some more? Carl wondered. He wasn’t sure he could 
hold himself back if they hurt the kids some more. 

The German woman had picked up a comer of the tarpaulin in the back 
of the truck and was examining the boxes there. “You were planning to run 
away, ja?” she said. “You and your husband and your family?” Still in the 
same even tone. Then her hand smacked the side of the truck and she bellowed: 
“You know you can be shot for this! Right now if I order it!” She glared 
at Amy and Amy stared back, and Cheryl and Jimmy began a new spate of 
crying. Still Amy said nothing. 

“I’m tired of talking to them,” said the woman to the others. “Take them 
and the truck back to Headquarters. I will meet you there later with the jeep.” 

As soon as the soldiers had passed out of sight, the black man turned to 
Carl and stuck out his hand. “I’m Amos Sampson, who are you?” 

Sampson’s grip was firm and dry. “Carl Hastings,” said Carl. “What are 
you doing up here?” 

“Same as you.” replied Sampson with a grin. “Hiding. Only 1 got some 
muscle.” His glance led Carl’s eye to a small cache of weapons near them 
which Carl in his single-mindedness had not noticed before. The cache 
consisted of two rifles, a pistol, clips of ammunition and a few grenades. 

"Where did you get it?” 



24 



GALAXY 




“Same place you got your rifle. From the dearly departed.” 

Carl had forgotten the rifle. He looked at it now, and he looked at Sampson. 
The man wore dark pants, dark shoes, dark shirt, dark windbreaker. Even 
resting, he possessed an inner tension like a coiled spring, seemingly ready 
to tackle any situation. “1 used to own a general store. What do you do?” 

Sampson rolled onto his back. He clasped his hands behind his head and 
stared up at the scudding clouds. "1 used to be a security guard,” he began 
quietly. “Until this morning. As 1 was coming off duty, I saw them coming 
down Main Street, a couple of jeeps leading a couple of dozen soldiers. They 
were shooting everyone they saw who was in uniform. Cops, firemen, nurses, 
pharmacists, crossing guards, boy scouts, it didn’t matter. They started with 
the fire station and then moved on toward City Hall. I stripped off my uniform 
and ran home half naked, got dressed and snuck back there. 1 played guerrilla 
during the rain, picking them off as 1 could and trying not to get caught. 
Since the rain stopped I’ve been up here, doing what 1 can for the Resistance. 
You know, little things.” He grinned again. “Things like saving your life.” 

“1 can’t thank you enough for that.” Carl admitted. “But who are these 
people trying to take over? What is the Third World Liberation Coalition? 
What do they want from us?” 

“Man. you’re full of questions, aren’t you?” 

“You’re the one with a grasp on the situation. All I’ve been doing since 
they came is running and hiding. And look what it got me. My wife, my 
kids, they ...” 

“Hey, take it easy,” said Sampson. “I’ll talk, okay?” He was up on one 
elbow, concent spreading across his face. “I was just mouthing off. Forget 
it, okay?” 

Carl gave him a sullen nod. “Okay.” 

Sampson smiled as he shook his head. “Man, you are going to make me 
blow my cover. But I guess it’s too late to hang onto it now. Okay. Here’s 
what I know.” He leaned back again and his eyes narrowed as if he was 
studying an invisible dossier. “The woman who was interrogating your wife 
is Eva Obendrein; until recently we thought she was still in West Germany 
coordinating terrorist attacks for the Baader-Meinhof gang. Now we know 
better. She is quite ruthless and there is a strong possibility that she will have 
your family executed if she can find some dogma to justify; if not, she might 
just hold them prisoner. Or they may be made examples of. I really don’t 
know. 

“The Third World Liberation Coalition seems to be a front for a number 
of terrorist groups-ltaly’s Red Brigades, Dutch Red Help, the IRA, the 
Japanese United Red Army, the Iranian National Front, and so on-in alliance 
with the Nicaraguan rebels of the Sardinista National Liberation Front and 
government forces from Cambodia, Uganda, Ethiopia, Syria, Lebanon and 
other Arab countries. How they’ve decided who’s in command, how they’re 
resolved their ideological differences, we have no idea. We don’t even know 
for sure which countries and groups are part of the Coalition and which are 
red herrings, intelligence ’leaked’ by the Coalition to confuse us. 

THE INVASION OF AMERICA 



25 




“There’s so much we don’t know! How they got the nuclear warheads into 
our major cities, how they got their forces into the country, how they managed 
to infiltrate nearly every community of any size, how many troops they 
actually have . The smile had long since faded. Now only sadness 
remained. “Hell, they’ve whipped us but good!” 

Carl thrust his head over the edge, counting bodies. “You’re doing all 
right.” 

Sampson let loose a snort. “Chicken feed.” he said. “I’m just a dog 
nipping at their heels.” 

Carl looked at the sky, looked at the street, watched the city hall bum, 
studied the still forms littering the lawn of the police station. “Bullshit!” he 
exploded. “Don’t give me any of that self-pity tripe. This morning 1 lost a 
good friend. This afternoon I lost my family. And in between 1 almost got 
killed by one of their agents.” Now he was pacing, back and forth, back and 
forth, letting the anger build. “Before, I was ready to run away. I couldn’t 
face the idea of my country being invaded, and 1 couldn’t see how 1 could 
do anything about it. But now you’ve shown me how. Of course we nip at 
their heels. Of course we pick them off one by one, as best we can. How 
else are we going to get our country back from these-these-un/Vna/j/?’ ' 

Sampson clapped his hands three times in laconic applause. “Thank you,” 
he said with what seemed to be genuine sincerity. 

Carl was puzzled. “For what?” 

“For convincing yourself to stay and fight. I was beginning to think I’d 
have to do it alone.” 

Carl stood there until the idea sank in, then exhaled in a slow whistle. 
“Amos, you’re a son of a bitch.” 

The faint grin on Amos’s face grew loud. “Why, thank you, Carl. That’s 
mighty white of you.” 

“Huh?” 

“I didn’t mention it before, but you got some kind of white powder all 
over you.” 

“I forgot all about it. Some kind of dust fell on me as I was coming up 
the stairs. I hit a wire or something and it all just cascaded down on top of 
me.” 

“Must have been plaster from the ceiling. This old building’s been threat- 
ening to fall down for some time.” 

“That’s what I thought had happened to me. But what the hell are we 
hanging around here for?” 

“Relax,” said Amos. “It’ll stand up for a few hours longer, at least until 
dark.” 

“And then what?” 

“Then we go play hero and rescue your family.” 

CHAPTER FIVE 

The dusk deepened, blue shading into black. 

On the rooftop, Carl watched the stars come out slowly, one by one. 
26 GALAXY 




Ragged patches of clouds tried in vain to hide the thin crescent of the moon. 
“Star light, star bright . murmured Carl, wishing, wishing. 

“Hey, dude,” said Amos, coming up behind him, “put these on. It’s 
getting close to time.” He thrust the bundle of clothes into Carl’s hands and 
ambled over to the weapons cache. 

“What’s this?” said Carl as he unfolded the bundle. 

“What’s it look like, thermal underwear? These are our credentials, jack, 
for getting into the inner sanctum.” 

Carl peeled off his shirt and began pulling on the fatigue blouse. “And 
for getting out?” 

“First let’s worry about getting in.” Amos was methodically breaking 
down one of the rifles into its component parts. “That thing fit okay? I had 
to guess on your size.” 

“It’ll do,” said Carl, stepping into the fatigue pants. “I don’t see how 
you can do that in the dark.” 

“Easy. Learned it in my third week of Basic Training.” The rifle was in 
pieces now. Amos removed the cleaning kit from the stock and began to oil 
and swab the barrel. “You have a good sleep?” 

“Some,” Carl allowed. The boots were going to be a bit tight. “Were 
you in Vietnam?” 

Amos shrugged. “1 don’t brag about it. You?” 

“Student deferment.” 

“Lucky.” 

“Maybe. It didn’t help me get it together.” 

It was too dark to see, but Carl felt Amos’s stare shifting all over him, 
making the unspoken comment. You think 'Nam would have done it for you ? 
Instead Amos said, “Speaking of getting it together . .” and he stood up 
and handed Carl a rifle. “Put this over your shoulder. And hold this one.” 

“Why two?” 

“We’ll need them, trust me. And here’s your half of the ammo.” He 
dumped the clips into Carl’s hands and moved away, only to reappear a few 
seconds later at the rooftop door, conducting a beam from his pencil flash 
to Carl’s boot tips and back again. Carl ran to catch up, wondering how 
Amos moved so lightly when he himself was weighted down by ammunition 
clips in front, back and thigh pockets. He reached the bottom of the stairs 
with a clatter of his thick boots and received from Amos a sharp, sibilant 
sssh. The flashlight beam probed the ceiling of the dead end, picking out the 
jagged hole where the ceiling had collapsed while Carl was under it. Bits of 
plaster drifted down as they watched. 

Amos swept the beam along the corridor, exposing doors on either side 
and Carl’s footprints down the middle. “Just so we know where we’re 
going,” he confided before turning off the Hash. The two raced to the door 
at the end. heard it scream as Amos kicked it open, and then they were in 
the alley. 

The street lights were out, as was to be expected, but even in the darkness 
keeping to the sidewalk was no problem. Then after a while shapes began 

THE INVASION OF AMERICA 



27 




to distinguish themselves. They stepped up the pace. 

“You sure this Zachary Taylor High School is their HQ?” 

“You’re the one who told me it had to be the place. Don’t you know? I 
thought you were the C. I. A. agent.” 

“Military Intelligence. And I don’t know everything.” 

“Then take your word for it. That’s their HQ.” 

The streets were empty and quiet. Carl had not realized just how much 
everyday noise he blocked out normally: traffic, kids at play, radios and tvs 
and stereos, even the humming of telephone lines. Now all was still. Around 
them nothing moved. In a deserted city they were the only travelers. 

“This is taking forever,” muttered Amos. “You know what a wolf trot 
is?” 

“Sure. I read. A hundred paces running, a hundred walking.” 

“Let’s do it.” 

Then it was run, walk, run, walk, until Carl felt his legs knotting up and 
the back of his shirt clammy with sweat. He envied the effortless ease with 
which Amos kept up the pace, never faltering, never slowing down, not even 
sweating. Walk, run, walk, run . until Carl’s lungs ached with every 
ragged breath. He stopped in a doorway, gasping. 

“I can’t do it,” he said when Amos turned back to him. “I'm just not in 
shape." 

Amos made a disgusted noise. “Yeah, I was wondering when you’d hang 
it up. I’ll go see what I can find. You stay here.” 

Two minutes later a Corvette with lights out glided silently up to Carl. 
“Don’t tell me you learned how to hotwire cars in Basic Training,” he said 
as he got in. 

“Sure,” Amos replied. “What do you think, I learned it in the ghetto?” 
“I didn’t even know we had a ghetto.” 

“We don’t. I’m from Chicago.” 

Amos drove like a maniac, roaring through the streets with only the stars 
to light the way, whipping around comers without down-shifting .... Carl 
yelled: “Are you crazy? All this noise will bring every patrol in town down 
on us!” 

“Do you see any patrols?’,’ 

“No-o.” 

“Do you hear any patrols?” 

“How can I with all the racket you’re making?” 

Amos slowed the Corvette so the engine’s roar muted to a hum. “That 
better?” 

“Some.” 

“Hear any patrols rtow?” 

“No. But that doesn’t mean-” 

“Anyway, aren’t we wearing enemy uniforms?” 

“Yeah, but-” 

“Then what are you worried about ?” 

“Getting killed before we get there.” 



28 



GALAXY 




Ten minutes later, at a slower, quieter speed, they got there. Once they 
were close enough to make out figures among the lights that lit the school 
and its outer perimeter, Amos pulled the car to the side of the road and he 
and Carl got out. “Are those lights going to be a problem?” said Carl as he 
slung a rifle over each shoulder. “Are we going to have to shoot them out?” 

“We do that and right away they’ll know something is up. Maybe on the 
way out.” Besides carrying rifles and ammunition, Amos wore a pistol stuck 
into his belt. From a back pocket, he pulled out a screwdriver and a length 
of piano wire wound around wooden rods at either end. To Carl’s querulous 
look he explained, “Guns are too noisy, at least until we lose the element 
of surprise.” 

They agreed to eliminate any soldiers guarding the lights, then enter the 
school, pretending to be Coalition troops, and from there play it by ear. Carl 
had serious misgivings about the credibility of such a plan but feeling a lack 
of expertise, he kept his doubts to himself. Maybe it would work, after all. 
Maybe it really would. 

“One thing before we go,” said Amos, “because it’s been puzzling me 
ever since you told me about this place. Why here? Why an old high school 
out here?” 

“This whole area was condemned when they decided to put an interstate 
highway through it. Then the federal funds got frozen, but they'd already 
torn down most of the houses and built a new school on the other side of 
town. After a while it became easier to ignore the problem than to try and 
do something about it. That’s government for you, no offense.” 

“I’m sorry I asked. Okay, let’s go.” 

Weeds choked vacant lots that had once held houses with lush lawns. 
Streets lay cracked and broken from the abuse of too much heavy machinery 
passing over them. The fence topped with barbed wire that enclosed the 
school had long since been violated; whole segments were missing. Amos 
and Carl crouched beside a huge hole in the fence and watched a guard amble 
past. As soon as he had passed, Amos leaped up and, screwdriver in hand, 
launched himself at the guard’s back. Carl heard a brief gurgle. The guard 
slumped and Amos returned, wiping the screwdriver. Carl shuddered. 

Two more guards were disposed of in the same way, Carl watching in 
horror while Amos did the dirty work. They left the bodies in the shadows. 
The killings brought them around to the front of the school, where they spied 
yet another guard trudging back and forth just beyond the glare of the lights. 
“You want to take him?” offered Amos in a whisper. “You got to do it 
some time.” 

Carl thought about Amy and the kids. “Okay,” he said at length. “How 
should it be done?” 

“Try this.” Amos handed him the screwdriver. “Just jam it into his ear 
as far as it will go.” 

’ Carl waited until the guard swung back. He ran forward on tiptoe, carrying 
the screwdriver underhand, like a knife. He hooked his arm around the 
soldier’s neck, digging under the chin and gripping the soldier’s right shoul- 

THE INVASION OF AMERICA 



29 




der. He brought up his right hand and held the point of the screwdriver level 
with the soldier’s ear. He, hesitated. This wasn’t the same as the struggle with 
Wheeler. That had been a matter of life or death, kill or be killed. This was, 
plain and simple, murder. He didn’t think he could do it. 

His intended victim changed his mind. A blow from the guard’s fist caught 
Carl in the side, just under the ribs. Another blow landed in the same place, 
and then the guard was trying to stomp on his toes. These unfair actions 
angered Carl to action. He jabbed the screwdriver in deep and hard, heard 
bones crunch and snap, felt blood gush warmly up the shank and over the 
handle and onto his hand. The guard coughed, choked, gurgled, lost all 
powers of resistance, drooped forward, sagged to the ground. 

Carl looked at the corpse, looked away, forced himself to look back, felt 
his stomach rising and dropping and rising again in protest. He staggered off 
to the shadows and was violently sick. 

A little later, a little weaker, he reflected that this was indeed war. And 
in war, anger was the least important reason for killing. You killed to stay 
alive. Carl resolved that he would stay alive. 

Meanwhile Amos dragged the body deeper into the darkness. On his return 
Carl joined him and the two stepped boldly into the light. It seemed no one 
was left to challenge them, though that did not prevent Carl from glancing 
furtively behind him as they mounted the broad steps to the doors. The lights 
were dazzling. Carl felt exposed. 

“Come on,” hissed Amos. “The place looks deserted.” 

Not quite. Bare bulbs strung every twenty feet or so along a hastily rigged 
wire shone dimly down on a dusty floor, disturbed by the tramping of many 
booted feet. Muffled thuds sounded from the second floor above. On a wall 
of the foyer was painted the Coalition symbol, a yellow circle quartered in 
red and black. At the end of the foyer was a doorless office and a corridor 
stretching right and left on either side. 

“You know the layout,” said Amos. “Fill me in." 

“To our right,” said Carl, pointing, “the auditorium. To our left the 
gymnasium. Classrooms on both floors, though 1 doubt there’s anything left 
in them now. Stairs at either end.” 

“Let’s check out the auditorium.” 

Not wanting to appear hurried or awkward or out of place, they walked 
at a casual pace. Carl glimpsed into doorless classrooms as they passed, 
seeing cartons filling one room, another empty but for the remnants of a fire 
that had burned a great black patch on the floor, another containing a couple 
of soldiers who looked incuriously at them, another occupied by a crude bed 
and the bed occupied by a big man with a bandaged head, another with an 
officer in it sitting at a small table and reading over some paperwork, and 
another, and another, and then they had reached the auditorium, the doors 
of which were surprisingly still intact. 

“This could be where it gets heavy,” murmured Amos, laying his hand 
on the door. “You ready?” Carl nodded assent. Amos pulled the door open. 

From behind them came a strangled cry: “Stop that man! Stop him! Stop 

30 GALAXY 




him!” 

Carl and Amos exchanged desperate looks. Without looking into the au- 
ditorium, Amos let the door shut and pressed his hand against it. 

Carl had briefed Amos long before on the matter of the blue pickup truck 
and his experience with its driver. Now, as the yells grew louder, the image 
of the big man with the bandaged head suddenly surfaced in his thoughts, 
and he summed up the cause of the yells in one word. "Wheeler.” 

"Oh, shit,” said Amos. He grabbed Carl’s elbow and hustled him into the 
nearest classroom, one of the empties. “Don’t go anywhere,” he instructed 
Carl, and stuck his head out the doorway. His body followed and he dis- 
appeared from view, only to return a few seconds later. "We are in trouble.” 
he announced, checking his weapons for full ammunition clips, getting 
battle-ready, getting out a grenade and hefting it in his hand. 

One word was sufficient to explain why. "Wheeler,” Carl said again. 

“Right,” said Amos. "Our only chance of making it now is to shut up 
your songbird friend before he costs us both our lives. That’s your job.” 

“Mine? What are you gonna do?” 

Amos held up the grenade, looking at it affectionately as if it were a ripe 
apple. “You want to get to Wheeler, so I’m creating a diversion to make 
sure you get there, is all. Here,” he said, tossing Carl the wooden-handled 
length of piano wire. “Don’t shoot him, he’s not worth it.” 

“Where will you be?” 

“I’ll be in the auditorium for a while. You stick around here after you get 
rid of Wheeler until I get back. Right now you wait until everyone goes by, 
then you go get Wheeler. Got it?” 

“Got it. Just don’t get killed.” 

“I won't if you won’t.” 

“You got a deal.” 

Carl crossed to the other side of the doorway and stood with his back hard 
against the wall. Out of sight of anyone else, he had an unobstructed view 
of the auditorium doors. Wheeler was still yelling, though his cries were 
getting weaker. Amos popped his head out, then nonchalantly walked to the 
auditorium doors, pulled the pin on the grenade. His mouth moved in silent 
counting. He opened the door a crack, tossed in the grenade, turned to the 
wall with his hands over his ears. There was a loud boom! One of the doors 
fell down. 

Amos was running the other way now, yelling "Intrus! lntrus!” which 
Carl assumed was French for intruder. Then Amos ran back, followed by 
four or five soldiers, one of whom was probably the officer. Or so Carl 
hoped. 

Carl placed one hand on the doorframe and swung out into the corridor. 
Behind him was shouting and shooting and the thuds of many boots. Ahead 
came only Wheeler’s “Stop him! Stop him!” like a broken record. Carl 
unwound the wire and snapped it taut between his hands. He found the right 
doorway, stood in it, stared at Wheeler. 

Wheeler stared back. Even as his voice faded away his jaw kept working, 

THE INVASION OF AMERICA 31 




trying for sounds that never came. His lips shaped a single syllable that might 
have been Who or Won- but came out as neither. It was a feeble, pathetic 
sound. 

Carl felt only disgust for the big man. He held the wire up and Wheeler’s 
eyes moved to it. widened, shifted back to Carl’s face. Carl took a step 
forward. Wheeler’s eyes were truly remarkable now. Framed by bandages 
above and below, they expressed a sequence of horror, fear, anger, defiance, 
and resignation; then they dulled, staring at the wire again as though it were 
a line drawn in the dust and Wheeler a mesmerized chicken. 

Carl was not fooled. He saw Wheeler’s hands stealing up the gray blanket, 
obviously reaching for a concealed weapon. But one more step brought him 
to Wheeler’s side. He put a stop to the man's furtive action by calmly and 
coldly pressing down on the bandaged nose with his thumb. Wheeler yelped. 
Blood began blotting the dingy gauze. 

“You’ll never get away with this,” croaked Wheeler. All the fight had 
gone out of him, except for his mouth. “Anyway, it’s too late. 1 saw them 
bring your wife and kids in. Real cute family. I also saw them shot.” Then 
he gulped, realizing his mistake. 

“Then there’s no point in keeping you alive, is there?” said Carl, moving 
behind Wheeler and looping the wire around his neck. He crossed the handles 
and pulled as tight as he could. Wheeler scrabbled his hands at his throat for 
a second or two, then gave up. His body jerked once, twice. 

Carl maintained his grip on the wire long after it ceased to matter, long 
after Wheeler ceased to be. He didn’t see Wheeler die, his eyes were too full 
of tears for that. He saw only the faces of Amy and Cheryl and Jimmy and 
his heart cried out. No. No. No. Wheeler had to have lied. He had to have 
lied. He had to. 

Otherwise what was the point of Carl staying alive? 

Carl’s awareness returned when an explosion seemed to shake the building. 
All the lights went out. He released his hold on the garrote around Wheeler’s 
neck and stood in the darkness, listening to far-off gunfire and the distant 
screams of the wounded. Amos must be doing one hell of a job, he thought, 
and wondered if he should go and helpv ’ v . 

He walked down the corridor, countingjdoorways ;as his hand slapped 
them. Reaching the dassroomiwhere Amoshad left him; he took three steps 
inside the room, froze, then hastily hacked out as quietly as he could. 

He had seen the red glow of a burning cigarette and smelled tobacco. 
Someone was in there? Amos? 

He couldn’t remember having seen Amos smoke. 

He could spray the room with bullets, but what if it was Amos in there? 
What if it was a civilian held prisoner? What if . .? Trapped by indecision, 
he stayed where he was and waited. 

He took his pulse and counted to 100. 

He noticed that his night vision had returned. He could see. Dimly. 

He remembered that he had left his weapons in the empty classroom. 

The realization came that he was being stupid. If someone was in the room 



32 



GALAXY 




smoking a cigarette then, with his night vision, he should be able to glimpse 
the face as that person took a puff. If nothing else , perhaps he could overpower 
the person. Then he’d feel safe, for the time being. 

Into the room he ventured, hardly daring to breathe. The glow was still 
there, and as he drew closer he expected a momentary brightness to reveal 
the face of the smoker. 

There was no momentary brightness. 

He hunkered down and began making circles on the floor with his fin- 
gertips, hoping to find his rifle. 

Then the smoker took a puff, the face was lit up, and a voice said, “Make 
any more moves and I blow your head off.” The accent was German. The 
voice was contralto. He heard the click of a pistol being cocked. 

That was it, it was all over, he was a dead man. 

“Okay if I talk?” he said. What the hell, there was nothing left to lose. 

“If it amuses you.” 

She must have taken both his rifles. They were probably over in the comer, 
next to her. There was no way he could get them. 

“You’re Eva Obendrein, right?” 

“If you say so.” 

“Earlier today you captured a woman and two children who were riding 
in a blue pickup truck.” 

“If you say so.” 

“Where are they?” 

He heard the woman make a sharp intake of breath. “What matter is that 
to you?” she said after a time. 

Carl waited a shorter time before replying. “I’m her husband.” 

“Ah. Of course. You came with the cavalry, hoping to rescue them. What 
a pity you are too late.” 

His scalp tightened. “What do you mean?” 

If there had been light, he would have seen her shrug. “They are no longer 
here. All have been sent to a detention camp until their guilt has been de- 
termined. Who knows, they may be innocent. If so, they will live. But you 
will die.” 

They were alive. They were alive. 

Eva Obendrein crushed her cigarette and struck a match to light another. 
Carl remembered to close one eye in time to preserve a little of his night 
vision. In the abrupt glare he saw the woman clearly. She was sitting on the 
floor with her back propped up against the wall under a boarded window. 
Where she clutched her side, blood had seeped through and spread on the 
floor until it caked in the dust. That she had put the pistol down to light the 
match, thus giving Carl a clear opportunity to rush her, no longer meant 
anything. Eva Obendrein was dying. 

“Where is this detention camp?” 

“Hundreds of miles away. Near Chicago.” Her voice was growing fainter. 

“How near?” 

A beam of light sprang from the doorway, shining full on Eva Obendrein. 
THE INVASION OF AMERICA 



33 




Her chin snapped up and she raised the gun shakily and squeezed the trigger. 
The hammer came down on nothing with a loud click. The gun was empty. 

The flashlight beam shifted to Carl. “You okay?” said Amos. 

Carl smiled without mirth. “Yeah. You?” He kept his eyes on Eva as he 
bent over her and picked up the rifles. She looked back weakly and her eyes 
were very old. 

“I broke a fingernail,” said Amos, “but I’ll live. Let’s get out of here.” 

“What about Eva Obendrein?” 

They heard shouts and running, getting louder. 

“Eva? We both know where she’s going. Come on, let’s get out of here. 
It sounds like we’re about to have company.” 

Carl led the way through the dark corridor and out through the foyer. Amos 
lagged behind to let loose a salvo of bullets that obliterated the Coalition 
symbol painted on the wall. Carl set his rifle on automatic fire and raked the 
lights that lit the school from outside, plunging the building into an exterior 
darkness to match the interior. The pair clattered down the steps but did not 
head straight out as Carl expected. Amos steered him left. 

“Where are you going?” puffed Carl. “We have to get to Chicago. You 
heard her say that my family was there.” 

“I heard. But let’s finish the job here first.” 

They rounded a comer of the gymnasium, rounded another. One lone guard 
fired a burst at them that missed, and Carl wiped him out without a second 
thought. On the football field, under the stars, the tank stood. Amos and Carl 
zigzagged toward it, shooting constantly, but it was unguarded. 

Amos clambered on top of the tread. “This is your standard M60 tank.” 
he said. “Stand away from it and give me about 45 seconds. Then watch the 
fireworks.” He opened a hatch on the turret and climbed inside. 

With a deep whirr of engines, the turret swung the cannon around until 
it pointed at the school. Carl stepped off to the side and held his ears. The 
cannon fired with a roar, telescoping into itself with the recoil. 

The noise was deafening. Where the cannon had aimed, the wall exploded, 
flinging debris high into the air. The cannon swung and fired again, swung 
again and fired. The school appeared to bend in on itself, as if a giant hand 
had pulled its strings from inside. The blast of the explosions echoed all 
around, then faded into stillness. 

The turret hatch popped open and Amos emerged. Carl forgot he was 
covering his ears until Amos climbed down and pulled Carl’s hands away. 
“You okay?” he asked loudly. 

“Sure,” said Carl. “I’m not even deaf.” 

Amos leaned against the tank and stared at the rubble. He whistled softiy 
between his teeth. 

“What are we standing around for? Chicago, remember?” 

“Yeah, I remember. 1 was just admiring my handiwork. Let’s go find the 
Corvette. We’ve got a lot of ground to cover before morning.” 



34 



-Gil Lament 
GALAXY 





WARRIORS 

By Jesse Peele 



PART 2 

VIII 

I he mists didn’t exactly roll away-it 
was the pain from the bum on his 
shoulder which told him he was still 
alive. That, and the cool air on his 
naked body .... 

Naked body? 

Painfully, Dal managed to raise his 
throbbing head and force his eyes 
open. Hmm. He was lying on his 
back, on a cushioned table that was 
soft against his bare skin, and son-of- 
a-bitch, he was naked. Not a thing 
on! 

He let his head fall back-that was 
a mistake because the throbbing which 
had only been terrible inside his ach- 
ing skull suddenly got worse. Where 
was he? How had he gotten here? The 
last thing he remembered was throw- 
ing his empty ceepee gun at a dive- 
bombing drone. He ought to be 
deader than black plastic! 



“Awake at last, I see,” said a 
voice from his right. It was a deep, 
honey-on-glass-smooth voice, a fe- 
male voice. He decided he liked it. 

So he tried to sit up. Whoops. 
There was something he hadn’t no- 
ticed before-his wrists and ankles 
were strapped down! 

“You and I are going to have a 
wonderful time,” the woman said. 
He managed to twist his head, and- 

Yep. There she was-the tall, red- 
haired lady in green, moving closer. 
Dal tried to smile. Too bad the wind 
wasn’t blowing. 

The smell of her perfume was nice; 
a heavy, musky scent, and she seemed 
to glide across the thick carpet like 
a dancer. 

When she was a meter away, she 
stopped. Her full, red lips pulled back 
into a sensual smile. Slowly, she 
reached to a clasp at her neck. She 
pulled the silver metal apart with a 
tiny click, threw back her shoulders, 



STAR WARRIORS 



35 




and~ 

The robe slithered down her body 
to the floor. 

Dal’s mouth got dry. The woman 
was wonderfully, beautifully, fan- 
tastically nude! 

The tips of her hard nipples couldn’t 
be that color, he decided-that had to 
be rouge. Her long, red hair fanned 
out over her shoulders and fell almost 
to her buttocks. She shifted her hips 
slightly, and the small muscles in her 
slim belly danced under her smooth 
skin. The line of her ribs pressed 
gently outward, accentuating the thin 
waist. Below that waist was her na- 
vel, and beneath that, a thin, 
red-and— curly line of hair began to 
swirl downward into a thicker- 

Dal’s mouth got very, very dry. He 
realized some of the throbbing in his 
head had subsided. Well. He knew 
where the pounding blood had 
gone-other things were beginning to 
throb .... 

“You’re a very brave man,” she 
said, bending over to touch her moist 
lips lightly to his chest. “I like brave 
men.” She bit lightly and smiled up 
at him. This close, Dal could see the 
whirling, too-gray color of her large, 
beautiful eyes. 

So. It was the Lady with Smoke 
Eyes-the Lady Ursula! 

And, don’t forget, the wife of Lord 
Kreeg Hookthom! 

She kissed him on the chest again, 
and still smiling, she slid the long 
nails of her right hand inside his left 
knee. She worked her fingers back 
and forth, scratching in small circles 
on his skin as her hand moved up- 
ward. 

Umm. Oh, yeah. 

Hey! a voice inside his mind yelled 
at him. This is the enemy! The wife 
36 



of the guy who shot your ship down! 

Go away, he told the inner voice. 

Wait! Listen! Don’t you remember 
the Starbird? 

The who? Ahhh. 

Idiot! What about the stories? About 
what she does to her lovers after- 
ward? 

The thick, red hair fell lightly 
across his body as the woman kissed 
him fully on the lips, her tongue prob- 
ing. 

Afterward? Who the hell cares 
about afterward? Gods, if only I 
could get my hands loose! 

That’s the spirit, said the voice. 
You could get away! 

Get away? You’re crazy! What I 
need my hands for is-wait. Just a 
minute. There was something he 
seemed to remember, something about 
the Lady with Smoke Eyes-what was 
it . .? 

Oh. Now he remembered. Oh, 
shit! 

Yeah, dummy, said the voice in- 
side his head. She’s supposed to chop 
’em up afterward, and eat part of ’em! 
Wanna guess which part she eats? 

Yeah, well, that was terrible and 
all, but the woman’s body was sliding 
slickly against his now, her breathing 
hot against his ear, the musk of her 
perfume filling his nostrils. Even if 
he wanted to stop-which he didn’t-he 
was tied . ! 

“Ursula!” roared a deep voice 
from somewhere nearby. 

The woman lifted her face from 
Dal’s slightly. “Shhh,” she whis- 
pered. “Maybe he won’t-” 

“Ursula! Where the hell are you?” 
The sound was definitely closer. 

“Oh, damn!” She looked down at 
Dal’s muscular body, at the evidence 
of his desire for her. “Too bad,” she 

GALAXY 




said with a sigh. “In here!” she 

yelled. 

“Who-?” Dal managed to croak. 

“Kreeg. He’s always spoiling my 
fun!” 

Kreeg? Oh. Kreeg. Lord Kreeg. 
Hookthom. 

My boy, you are in deep shit! 

And the throbbing in his head 
started back up as more blood became 
available from another source; as 
Dal's desire wilted like a paper flower 
in a hurricane. 

The door to the dimly lit room 
opened, and the lights flared on 
brightly-much too brightly. 

Lord Kreeg Hookthom. All two 
meters and one-hundred-and-ten kilos 
of him, blocking out almost the 
whole entrance. He was dressed in 
the legendary black uniform he sup- 
posedly always wore. Thick, brown 
and curly hair sprouted from his 
squarish head, and the heavy beard 
was shot through with streaks of 
lighter gray. His teeth gleamed whitely 
against the darkness of his facial hair 
when he smiled. 

“I hate to break up your little 
party-but there’s an intruder loose on 
the base. The stupid Division Com- 
mander said he’d been trapped in this 
area and hit by a clone-drone-but 
nobody can find the body.” He 
stopped, and looked at Dal, then back 
at his wife. “Who’s your friend, 
Ursula? He doesn’t look familiar.” 

“He’s mine! You said I could have 
anybody I wanted, anytime!” She 
glared at Hookthom, legs spread 
widei her hands on her bare hips. 

“Aha! So that’s where the bastard 
went! You got him! I should have 
known.” 

“Kreeg, you said-" 

“You can have him back. 

STAR WARRIORS 



Later . after I’ve finished with 
him.” 

"After you get through with him, 
there won’t be anything left worth 
having. There never is.” 

Oh, fine. Dal thought. Not just 
deep-you’re in a mountain of it! 

★ 

“Your story stinks!” 

So did Hookthom’s breath, but Dal 
didn’t mention that. 

“You say you outflew twelve of 
my ships, alone, landed that wreck 
and survived? And then you crossed 
a thousand kilometers of jungle and 
wandered onto a guarded military 
base?” 

“I’ve always been lucky.” 
Hookthom backhanded Dal across 
the face, rocking his already painful 
head and bringing a bright red flush 
to one cheek. “Not any more. Your 
luck just expired! You’re going to tell 
me who sent you, and how you knew 
I was on this world. And a lot of other 
information you probably didn’t even 
realize you knew. And then, if you’re 
lucky, 1 might let you die.” 

Dal’s mouth hurt, but he managed 
a grin-a small one. “Well, if I have 
to go, I’d prefer your wife’s method-” 
Hookthom slapped him again. 
“We’ll see how smart you are in a 
little while!” Hookthom turned and 
stalked over to a com panel. “Get the 
goddamned medic over here!” 

There was a two-second pause. 
“Uh . sir, he’s . gone into 
town . .” 

Hookthom glared at the com. 
“Well, find him! I want him here in 
fifteen minutes! If he’s not, you will 
personally scrape entry-bum from 
the nose of every ship in the fleet!” 



37 




“Yes, sir! He’ll be there!” 

“How the hell am I going to con- 
quer a galaxy when I’m surrounded 
by idiots'?” 

“Tough to get good help,” Dal 
said. 

★ 

The whitecoated psychomech 
pushed in a cart covered with glittery 
things-things Dal didn’t want to look 
too closely at; he had a feeling he’d 
find out their function soon enough. 

The man was short, fat, and had 
an almost cherubic smile. He also 
smelled of alcohol-the medical kind. 
And like something which ought to 
be preserved in a jar somewhere. 

"1 want to know everything he 
learned since he was potty-trained. 
And I want to know it quickly!” 

“Of course, Lord,” the fat man 
said. “If you’d care to return in, say, 
half an hour. I’m sure I’ll be finished 
by then.” 

Hookthom grinned. “Well! A man 
who knows his job! What a change. 
I’ll be back in half an hour.” 

After he left, the fat medic moved 
toward Dal, holding a card in his 
chubby hand. “First, a simple test. 
Look at this.” 

Dal glared at the card. He’d be 
damned if he was going to cooperate. 

But the card said, “Don’t say any- 
thing. Just play along. The room is 
probably monitered.” 

Dal nodded. 

“Good, good. Now, we must have 
your complete relaxation. I realize 
that will be somewhat hard for you 
to do voluntarily, under the circum- 
stances. However. 1 will give you an 
injection of nospas, and-” he stopped. 



“Excuse me, when did you last 
urinate?” 

“Huh? I don’t remember. A few 
hours ago.” 

“Um. Won’t do. I’m afraid. The 
nospas will relax the bladder sphinc- 
ter muscles. Messy.” He turned to 
the door. 

“Guard!” 

The portal dilated a fraction. 
“Yeah?” 

“This man isn’t ready for therapy. 
He’s got to go to the bathroom.” 

“What?” 

“The bathroom. This man has got 
to go!” 

“Look, uh . doc . .” 

“Doctor Bone, doctor C’min al- 
Bone. Open the portal!” 

“I was told not to let anybody-” 

“Lord Hookthom is going to be 
returning in less than thirty minutes, 
expecting to find this man ready to 




38 



GALAXY 




answer his questions. What do you 
think he’ll do to you when I tell him 
you wouldn’t let me prepare my pa- 
tient to answer those questions?’ ’ 

“Uh, well, yeah, 1 guess he can 
go to the head. But I’ll haveta come 
with you!” 

The medic looked at the gray ceil- 
ing, apparently bored. “Whatever.” 

The guard dilated the door and 
stepped inside, his particle spitter 
held at the ready. 

“Take him along,” Dr. Bone said. 
“I’ll be right along behind you-I’ve 
got to check out my 
encephalo-stunner. ’ ’ 

The guard nudged Dal with his 
weapon, and Dal stumbled toward the 
portal, feeling very clumsy with his 
hands tied behind him. The thin, syn- 
tho— silk straps cut into his wrists; he 
could feel his hands getting numb. 

Thwack! There was a sound behind 
him like a melon dropped onto a tile 
floor. Dal spun, to see the guard fall- 
ing, the medic holding a heavy chunk 
of machinery. The fat man grinned. 
“Had to test the 
encephalo-stunner-seems it works 
just fine!” Then the medic’s form 
became a blur .... 

It must be Lin . No! It was-Lao 
Emba! 

“How did-?” 

“Never mind. I couldn’t hold the 
mind-form any longer. Let’s get out 
of here.” He pulled the knife he car- 
ried on his thigh from its clear scab- 
bard and deftly cut the bindings on 
Dal’s wrists. Dal’s hands burned as 
the blood came back into them. 

“What about the bugs . .?” 

In answer, an alarm began to 
squeal. 

“Move, boy, dammit, move!” 

Dal moved. “Which way?” 

STAR WARRIORS 



“There! I’ve got a vehicle waiting 
outside the south perimeter.” 

“What about the fence? It’s laser- 
rigged.” 

“Don’t worry! Just move your 
butt! Now!” 

“Sometime you’ll have to teach 
me some of those Ch’an tricks.” 

“Later, boy, later!” 

Somehow, they reached the fence. 
On the other side was a large 
air-cushion car. But the fence. 

Emba sang several bars-in Tro- 
gian. 

The thick, green brush seemed to 
burst open as Tulak appeared. He was 
carrying a log nearly as big around 
as he was. With seeming ease, he 
hoisted the log by one end, and let 
it fall forward onto the fence. 

The lasers flashed, and the massive 
log burst into flame, charring into 
smelly, resin-popping smoke. 

But the weight was too much-the 
chain-link steel bent, bowed, 
and-gave! The automatic lasers con- 
tinued to roast the log, but there were 
gaps around it that were large enough. 

“Duck!” screamed a raspy voice. 

Dal dropped, and a thin beam of 
high-energy crackled over his head. 
With his face lifted slightly from the 
dirt, he saw Lincheni standing on the 
opposite side of the fence next to 
Tulak. The Demi — Whelf crouched 
and fired his own particle spitter. 
There was a gurgling yell behind Dal 
as Lin’s shot struck its mark. 

“Boy,” Emba said, “ do 1 have 
to tell you-” 

But Dal was up and moving. He 
jumped through a gap in the tom 
fence, just missing one of the still- 
firing laser beams. 

Tulak was already in the car, along 
with Lin, who was sending his furry 



39 




hands flying over the controls. 

“You don’t know how happy I am 
to see you!” Dal gasped. 

“I could hazard a guess,” Lin 
said, grinning. 

“Pursuit approaches,” Tulak sang. 
“I suggest we depart.” 

The air car sprang as if goosed, 
and Dal felt himself pulled back into 
the seat by the acceleration. 

To his left, Emba glared at him. 
“Listen, fool! The next time you go 
flitting off without my permission, 
1 will leave your ass to rot! Under- 
stood?” 

Dal nodded. Yeah. That didn’t 
seem like such bad advice. 

X 

“You’re kind of stupid, you know 
that?” Tanya said. She had changed 
from the sleeping robe into a one- 
piece blue jump — suit. The thicker 
cloth hid her shape better than the 
robe, but not much-a fact of which 
Dal was almost painfully aware. He 
was beginning to feel like a long-time 
celibate. 

The girl’s pretty face was angry 
looking. “You could have blown 
everything with that stunt!” 

“Everything? What everything? 
Why, if Hookthom found out that an 
old man, a girl, a robot, a Demi- 
Whelf and I intended to destroy his 
navy, he’d have been terrified.” 

“If he didn’t laugh himself to 
death,” Lin added. 

Emba looked at Tanya, then at 
Dal. “Okay. Harusun, I admit we 
haven’t told you everything.” 

“My! What a surprise! Doesn’t 
that surprise you, Lin? Why, I’ll bet 
even Tulak is surprised.” 



“Negative,” chimed Tulak. “Iam 
not-’ ’ 

“Never mind!” Dal glared at the 
robot. “You haven’t told us any- 
thing! Either we know what’s going 
on, or you can shove this whole thing 
up your-” 

“All right,” Emba said. “There 
is a plan . .” 

★ 

“That’s your plan?” Dal said, 
amazed. He looked at Lin. 

“Well,” Lin said, “it is better 
than just five of us. Not much better, 
maybe, but. .” 

“What’s the matter, Harusun?” 
Tanya asked. “Don’t you think you 
can do your part?” 

“It’s not that! It’s just-” 

“I told you,” she said to Emba. 
“I knew we couldn’t depend on 
this-this pirate.” 

“Listen, sweetheart, Lin, Tulak 
and 1 can fly figure eights around any 
one of Hookthorn’s ships. Against 
any five ships! But we can’t beat a 
dozen-ship patrol!” 

“You don’t have to defeat them,” 
Emba said. “Just keep them busy.” 
“Oh, fine! What happens when 
another fifty ships flame up to help 
out? The only thing they’ll be busy 
doing is figuring out how to sponge 
our remains up from the landscape!” 
“The base will have troubles of its 
own.” 

“Oh, yeah, I forgot. You and the 
snakes will be destroying it. Sure!” 
Emba and Tanya looked at each 
other. “I think it’s time you met Sne- 
gala,” the old man said. 

Tanya nodded, and grinned. 

★ 



40 



GALAXY 




From the air, the weedpatch still 
looked like an iron wheatfield. Emba 
landed the flitter in a clearing, and 
the five passengers alighted. 

As they approached the edge of the 
weed, Emba spoke into a small trans- 
ceiver. 

Sweat formed and ran down inside 
Dal’s tunic. 

The jungle air was too damp with 
humidity for the moisture on his body 
to evaporate. The smell of the too- 
thick foliage was oppressively sweet 
and decaying. They misnamed this 
planet. Dal thought. They should 
have called it ‘rotten.’ 

A clinking sound vibrated through 
the weed. The sound increased, until 
it was like a hammer on thin sheet 
metal. Then- 

Son-of-a-bitch. Dal stared at the 
thing that pushed the iron stems aside 
easily as it slithered into the clearing! 

It was basically snake-like in shape, 
in that it was long and tube-like-a 
good five meters long, and as big 
around as Dal’s thigh. But it didn’t 
look like any snake Dal had ever 
seen. 

First, the head was all wrong-the 
thing’s mouth opened from 
side-to-side, like a crab’s claw, in- 
stead of up and down, like a snake. 
There didn’t seem to be any teeth; 
instead, there were razorsharp plates 
lining both sides. Logically, that 
made sense-if the Culebrath snipped 
the iron-weed, it wouldn’t have to 
turn its head to do so. 

Along both sides of the creature’s 
body, there were rows of hook-like 
fins, each fingerthick, and perhaps 
ten centimeters long. When the crea- 
ture lifted its head slightly. Dal could 
see a similar row of spikes. An in- 
teresting method of locomotion. In 

STAR WARRIORS 



the weed, they could hook the fins 
around the stalks. On the ground, 
they could dig those under-fins into 
the ground and pull. 

Its skin seemed metallic. There 
were segments every few centimeters 
along its length which seemed to be 
some kind of joint. The creature was 
basically a dull gray color, with 
flecks of fire red scattered over it. 
There were no eyes Dal could 
see-maybe it used a sonar or radar 
for ‘seeing.’ There were two small 
holes on top of the head which could 
have been nostrils. 

“I can speak some Culebrath,” 
Emba said, interrupting Dal’s 
thoughts. ‘‘But Snegala can under- 
stand and speak basic Interspeak, as 
well.” 

Emba moved closer to the creature 
on the ground. “Snegala, these be 
friends.” 

Snegala gargled, a high, quavering 
sound. “I be happy meeting friends.” 

“Does he know what you’ve got 
planned?” Dal asked. 

“Yes. He and his people are will- 
ing to help.” 

“Pardon me,” Lin said, “but he 
doesn’t look very mobile. Can they 
help?’ 

Emba nodded. “Can show friends 
eat thing, Snegala?” 

“Can show.” 

Tanya stepped forward. She was 
holding a large metal bar, heavy from 
the look of it, as thick as Dal’s wrist. 
She stood the bar on its end in front 
of the Culebrath. It wasn’t balanced 
well, however, and it started to fall. 

Before the bar had tipped more 
than a few degrees, Snegala 
lunged-incredibly fast-and clamped 
his cross-jaws onto it. Chink! Sud- 
denly there were two small pieces of 



41 




bar lying on the ground! But more 
than half the thick metal was . 
gone! 

Eaten. 

Before Dal could speak. Emba did. 
“Be okay show friends gun-thing?” 

“Be okay.” 

Emba turned to Lin. “Can I bor- 
row your weapon?” 

Lin nodded, and handed it to him. 

Dal looked puzzled. Was it going 
to eat the gun . ? 

But Emba turned back to Snegala 
and without pausing, he fired the spit- 
ter at the prone creature! 

“Hey!” Dal yelled. 

Emba ignored him The stream of 
deadly particles hit Snegala about 
mid-body. Emba played the green 
line back and forth over the Culebrath 
for about two seconds before he 
stopped. There was a hot metal stink, 
like an ore furnace. The ground 
around the Culebrath smouldered and 
made little popping noises. 

“How you be feeling?” Emba 
asked. 

“Be feeling okay.” 

“Be damaged?” 

“No.” 

Dal and Lin stared at each other. 
The Demi-Whelf shrugged his hairy 
shoulders. Damn! Tulak could take 
a hit from a ceepee and survive-but 
he was a robot! Snegala didn’t seem 
to be bothered at all! 

“Uh, how is he against a laser?” 
Dal finally managed to ask. 

“Not as good. After a few seconds 
of standard anti-personnel laser fire, 
he gets uncomfortable.” 

Uncomfortable? Shit! Even Tulak 
couldn’t take laser fire without dam- 
age! 

“Well?” Tanya said, smiling 
broadly at Dal. 

42 



“Uh. Well. Um.” Even his hands 
were sweaty now. 

Lin scratched at his belly-fur. 
“Got to admit a few of his friends 
could cause a stir coming across a 
compound toward you.” 

“Snegala says he will have eight 
hundred of his brothers ready to hit 
the military base in a week.” 

Well, Dal thought. That certainly 
would create a diversion at the base. 

“Okay, so the base is busy. And 
the three of us play dodge-rocket 
with Hookthom’s patrol— it’ll still be 
close! You’ll need a damned good 
pilot to sneak a ship into hyper during 
this raid. And it’ll take him a month 
before he can get to a Confed base 
and back with enough help to take 
out Hookthom!.” 

“It’ll take her a month,” Tanya 
said. 

“What?” 

“I’ll be flying the message ship.” 

“You?” 

“What’s so amazing about that? 
I’m a good pilot.” 

“But-but-” 

“When my father died, I auto- 
matically became a senator, as his 
only surviving relative. Besides, do 
you think the Confederation would 
believe you if you told them?” 

“She has a point,” Lincheni ob- 
served. 

“You seem to forget something!” 
Dal said. “Even if everything goes 
as planned-which isn’t all that 
likely— the basic problem Emba men- 
tioned earlier still exists. What’s to 
stop the Confed’s navy from 
hell-bombing the whole planet?” 

“Ah, a good point!” Emba said. 
“By the time Tanya gets back, we 
will have lured most of his ships 
off-planet. The Confederation ships 



GALAXY 




will take them in space.” 

“Just how the hell do you plan to 
do that?” 

Emba grinned. “Not me, my 
boy-us! There’s a way.” 

Dal looked at Lin, then at the im- 
passive facade of Tulak. 

It seemed he’d heard that one be- 
fore. 

“I don’t think I want to hear this,” 
he said, feeling doomed. 

But of course he heard it anyway. 

X 

Trees and smelly bushes, insects 
and heat. Even in the dark, now 
nearly midnight, the damned jungle 
was ungodly hot and sinus-congest- 
ing wet. If 1 ever get out of this. Dal 
thought, it will be a cold day in hell 
before I go to another tropical world! 

Aloud, he said, “1 told you, gate 
security will be too tight. This is the 
only way!” 

“I don’t see why we can’t just steal 
a small flitter and hop the damned 
fence,” Lin said. The heat seemed 
to be bothering him more than it did 
Dal-but then, that figured-fur coats 
were no help unless it was cold. 

• “Tell him. Tulak.” 

“The inner perimeter of the fence 
is equipped with automatic 
anti-aircraft weaponry. Any low- 
flying vehicle attempting entry over 
the fence would be fired upon.” 

‘ ‘ Y eah? Then what about your plan 
to leave when you were in earlier, 
Dal? You were going to fly out.” 

“I didn’t know about it then. I’d 
have been roasted.” 

“Oh.” 

“Yeah. Tulak, you have the 
charges?” Stupid question. Of course 
he had them. 



“Affirmative.” 

“I hope they work!” Lin rasped. 

“The explosives are operational,” 
Tulak sang. 

“Yeah, but will they be strong 
enough to knock a hole in the fence 
and destroy the nearest lasers?” 

“I have calculated that they will 
be sufficient.” 

Lin shook his head. In the dim 
moonlight. Dal could just barely see 
the gleam of the Demi-Whelf’s eyes. 

“So we just crash the fence, run 
like racelots with our tails on fire and 
pray, right?” 

“You losing your nerve in your 
old age, Lin?” Dal grinned. 

“No! I just hoped to be able to 
breed at least once before I got too 
old.” 

“Cheer up. The ship we want is 
less than a klick away! It’s late, it’s 
dark, there are three of us and only 
a few thousand of them. We’ll make 
it!” 

Lin looked up at the faint blue 
gleam from Tulak’s face-slit. “What 
about Tulak? How fast-?” 

“On a hundred-meter dash, he can 
spot me ten meters and still beat me 
by ten.” 

“Big deal! / can do that.” 

Dal chuckled. “When I’m running 
for my hide, you’d be surprised at 
how much faster I am.” 

They moved forward in the damp 
and smelly underbrush in a crouch. 
Just ahead, the pale moonlight re- 
flected from the laser-trapped 
chain-link fence. 

Dal looked at his chrono. “Two 
minutes. Get ready.” 

“Hey,” Lin said, “just what is 
this diversion Emba has planned?” 

“He didn’t say-but he said we’d 
probably be able to see it. And he 



STAR WARRIORS 



43 




said we’ve got fifteen minutes to get 
set before Snegala and his brothers 
go to it.” 

The seconds hummed by slowly. 
The two minutes seemed like two 
thousand years-and yet only two sec- 
onds .... 

“There!” Lin growled. 

The three of them stared. They 
were on the south side of the com- 
pound. To the northeast, suddenly 
there was a light! 

The night sky began to glow, in 
shades of red and blue and yellow. 
Then, in the midst of the colors, an 
image began to form .... 

It was-a-a woman! A giant, hol- 
ographic image of a — a naked woman! 
The shape was slender, with large 
breasts, and long, red hair .... 

“Holy shit!” Dal said. “That’s a 
picture of the Lady-” 

“Come on!” Lin shouted. “It’s 
supposed to distract the troops-not 
us!” 

“Yeah, right!” But certain mem- 
ories arose .... 

Dal and Lin scuttled toward the 
fence. Tulak was setting the last of 
the charges, being careful not to 
touch the deadly wire. 

To the northeast, the giant picture 
began gesturing obscenely. Dal could 
imagine what Hookthom would be 
telling his men. 

Kaboom! The explosion’s concus- 
sion rocked Dal. His ears rang with 
the sound, and there was a burned, 
dusty smell. The fence was 
down-there was a gap a tank could 
move through. 

They ran through the twisted frag- 
ments of still-smoking fence. 

“Halt! Who’s there?” 

A guard! Dal increased his speed, 
and almost ran over Lincheni, just 

44 




ahead of him! 

A bright, red beam lanced at them 
from behind and to the left. It missed 
Dal by less than a meter! 

Without slowing. Dal drew the 
new ceepee spitter Emba had gotten 
him, and fired a quick blast of green 
energy at the guard. He missed, but 
the man dropped and began scream- 
ing for help. 

Dal heard Lincheni curse, then a 
thump, like a falling body. What-? 

Then his shin smashed into some- 
thing hard, and he half-flipped into 
the air. He managed to tuck his shoul- 
der and come up in a back-jarring 
roll-but his lower leg hurt like hell! 

They rounded a dimly lit comer 
into the darkness between two fea- 
tureless gray buildings. 

“Bastard!” Dal said. “Why didn’t 
you tell me there was something there 
to trip on?” He bent over to massage 
his swelling shin. 



GALAXY 



Lin was still cursing, rubbing at 
the front of his own furry thigh. 
“When did I have time? You were 
digging blisters on my heels!” He 
resumed cursing. 

“Tulak? Did you miss the obstruc- 
tion?” 

“I went through it,” Tulak said. 
“It was merely a wooden rail, prob- 
ably placed there in order to-” 

“Never mind!” All Dal needed 
was a lecture on the mechanical con- 
struction of a military base. 

The three moved forward past the 
looming buildings, until they were at 
the edge of the landing field. 

Here were rows and rows of 
black-hulled ships: fighters, tankers, 
troop-carriers, supply vessels-a small 
navy. Most of these had rudimentary 
aerodynamic hulls, being both space 
and atmosphere craft. 

“Come on,” Dal said. "This way.” 

The three skulked through the 
dimly lit area, watching for addi- 
tional guards. The sky to the north- 
east was growing darker-Emba’s 
hologram was fading-they’d have to 
huny! 

The smell of reactor damping was 
strong here, mixed with the smells 
of various oils and gases. It took ten 
minutes for them to locate the ship. 

“Oh, wow!” Lin rasped. “Look 
at that mother!” 

The ship sat alone in a cleared area. 
It was a black, flattened oval, easily 
twice the size of the dead Starbird. 
Thin tail and side fins jutted from the 
craft, which was set in a position of 
lift-off. 

It was a Styne-Allison Fighter-the 
fastest and most deadly piece of 
equipment ever designed by mankind 
for space warfare! While the rest of 
Hookthom’s rag-tag navy was com- 

STAR WARRIORS 



posed of standard ships-Henry and 
Cither class cruisers, Boeingheed 
Battle wagons and Lazney Lancers, 
this ship was nearly unique! There 
were perhaps two hundred such ships 
operational in the entire Galaxy. It 
cost a planet’s ransom, and in battle, 
was damned well worth it! 

Around the base of the sleek ship 
were at least six armed guards. 

“Doesn’t look like they want any- 
body to borrow it,” Lin said. 

“Probably not-it’s Hookthorn’s 
personal baby! 

“So how do we get it? Walk up 
and ask?” 

Dal grinned. “Simple. Tulak will 
back off a little and give ’em a 
hundred decibels of ‘A’ above high 
‘C.’ You and I will sneak up behind 
them.” 

“Mad,” Lin muttered. “All Ear- 
thies are mad.” 

“What?” 

“Nothing. We sneak up behind 
them.” 

When they heard the ear-drilling 
squeal of Tulak’s tone, three of the 
guards immediately took off to find 
the source of the sound. That left only 
three to watch the ship. 

Dal kicked one of the remaining 
men smack on the side of the head 
with a roundhouse kick which would 
have made his old Oppugnate sensei 
proud-the man went down as if a rug 
had been jerked from under him. 

Lin shot the other two with his spit- 
ter. 

“You got no class, Lincheni!” 

“Yeah? You want to play martial 
artist, fine! Me, I want to stay alive!” 

The high-pitched wail stopped, as 
if a switch had been snapped off. A 
few seconds later, Tulak’s massive 
frame came into view, dim light shin- 

45 




ing from his tall silver form. 

“The other guards . .?” Lin 
asked. 

“They fired on me,” Tulak said. 

Dal nodded. The big robot wasn’t 
allowed to use any weapons but his 
own body, and then only in 
self-defense. But Dal remembered 
the attack of the rhino-thing after 
they’d first landed on this world-and 
the broken skull Tulak had dealt it 
with one fist! 

“Come on, let’s get on board!” 

★ 

“Can you fly this thing?” Lin 
asked. “It looks pretty compli- 
cated.” 

“I can fly it! Can you figure out 
how to operate the comp and the 
weapons-systems?’ ’ 

Lin looked insulted. “If a human 
can design it, a whelf can run it!” 

“Tulak?” 

The big robot wasialready seated 
in the too-small-for-him navi- 
gator/power control section. His an- 
swer ran out over the comp. “The 
controls are simple; I can operate 
them with no difficulty.” 

“Dammit! We’ve got our ship!” 

“Yeah,” Lin said sourly, “now 
all we have to do is get away with 
it!” 

Dal looked at his chrono. “Emba’s 
got the Culebrath hitting the fences 
in five minutes.” 

Four minutes passed. Three min- 
utes. Two. One. 

“Move it!” Dal yelled. 

Tulak punched in take-off power. 
Dal tapped in the launch pattern. 

They were off! Even in the ak- 
cel-couches, the G-pull was chest 
mashing. “Man, oh, man, has this 
46 



thing got power!” 

Almost instantly it seemed, they 
were in space. 

Next to Dal, Lin chortled. 

“Look at this! This thing’s got cee- 
pee cannons, lasers, proximity mines, 
cobalt torpedoes, the works! And the 
computer! It’s a fully programmed 
MJ-Reefer-Single-Hit system! Fan- 
tastic!” 

Three minutes out, Dal turned to 
look at Lin. “Okay. We’ve got our 
ship-the ship the bastards owed us!” 

“And then some!” Lin rasped, his 
fingers dancing over the instrument 
controls. 

“What I mean is, if we keep her 
straight out, we can hit hyper long 
before any patrol could possibly touch 
us.” 

Lin said nothing. 

“Hey, we don’t owe them any- 
thing! We’re even! With this ship, 
we can make a fortune!” 

“My breeding money,” Lin said 
softly. 

“Why should we get killed?” Dal 
continued. “Even in this baby, a 
twelve-ship patrol would be tough, 
right?” 

“Even allowing for our superiority 
of firepower and speed, our chances 
would still be one-in-three of surviv- 
ing a battle,” Tulak chimed in. 

“Tanya’s ship will be leaving 
shortly,” Lin said, looking from his 
instrument board to Dal. 

Dal stared at the viewscreens. 
“Yeah.” 

“No way she can make it without 
us,” Lin said. 

Dal sighed. “Did I ever tell you 
you’re a pain in the ass, Lin?” 

The whelf grinned. “I seem to re- 
call that you have.” 

“Ah, hell!” Dal’s grin was bigger 

GALAXY 




than Lin’s. “We got surprise-let’s go 
find Hookthom’s lousy patrol!” 

“Why not?” Lin said. “Mating 
season isn’t for another two years!” 

“Tulak?” 

“Course locked in. We’ll arrive in 
the vicinity of the patrol in six point 
four minutes.” 

What the hell. Dal thought. What 
the hell! 

XI 

Six minutes wasn’t very long, but 
Dal had been flying space craft since 
he was thirteen— illegally, of 
course, but for nearly ten years. He 
let his hands begin to get the feel of 
the ship, and he was pleased. The 
response was instant-instant and ex- 
act; it was a magnificent machine! 

“What’s the name of our new bird, 
anyway?” he asked. 

Lin stroked the comp controls for 
the ship’s log. A second later, he 
laughed. 

“What?” 

“The name! Hookthom called it 

Revenge! 

Dal’s laugh blended with Lin’s. 
Now that was fitting! Only it wasn’t 
Hookthom who was going to be on 
the giving end! 

“Now approaching enemy ves- 
sels,” Tulak sang. 

“Got ’em on the view screens!” 
Lin said. “1 bet they’re wondering 
what Lord Hookthom himself is doing 
out here. Surprise inspection, maybe? 
Or maybe they heard about the attack 
on the base and figure Hookthom is 
running!” 

“Yeah, or maybe they think we’re 
the ghost of Christmas past!” Dal 
said. “Let’s give ’em something else 
to worry about!” 

STAR WARRIORS 



The transceiver blared. Someone 
was requesting an ID code, 

“This is Lord Kreeg Hookthom!” 
Dal roared. “What the hell do you 
mean you want an ID code? Don’t 
you recognize my ship?” 

The Revenge sped closer toward 
the patrol. 

“Er-that is, your orders. Lord, 
you said nobody-” 

“Fool! Do you think I meant me?” 
Dal grinned at Lin. 

There was a pause, and Dal cut his 
’caster off. “How many of ’em can 
we get on one pass, Lin?” 

“Computer says maximum of 
three.” 

The transceiver crackled again. 
“I’m sorry. Lord, but I must insist-” 
“W'hat was your rank, private 
whoever-you-are?” Dal tried to sound 
menacing. 

“Lord! I’m only following your 
orders!” 

“Close enough!” Lin growled. 
“Good! Let ’em have it!” 

“What was that. Lord?” asked the 
voice over the speaker. 

“Never mind!” Dal said. “I pro- 
mote you again. And good-bye!” 
Lin’s hands did their magic dance, 
and the Revenge shook with the force 
of its firing weapon^ . 

On the screen, two of the ships 
flared into brilliant whiteness, into a 
slashing, silent explosion of light! 
The viewer polarizers cut in, dim- 
ming the scene. 

Then, a third ship, raked by laser 
fire, ruptured into three uneven frag- 
ments, a cloud of frozen oxy turning 
into a shroud of ice crystals around 
its corpse. 

“Evasive running! Juice it, Tu- 
lak!” 

“Affirmative.” 



47 




“Here they come!*’ Lin said. “I'm 
seeding proximity mines!” 

Behind the speeding black ship, 
small orbs of dark plastic spewed 
out-the proximity mines-along with 
streamers of radar-jamming alumi- 
num and tiny clumps of broad-signal 
beepers! 

“Mines away!” 

“All right!” Dal put the Revenge 
into a tight, down-right curve. 

On the rear-view scanners, a patrol 
ship blossomed into incandescence 
as it plowed into one of the deadly 
mines! Several other of the killing 
devices went off, triggered by frag- 
ments of the exploding ship. The re- 
maining ships broke off in a sharp 
up-tum. 

Four down, eight to go! 

The Revenge shook suddenly-Dal 
felt the jolt from the bottom of his 
spine to the top of his skull. 

“Tulak?” 

“We have sustained a laser blast 
on our stem screen, to the port side. ” 

“Damage?” 

“Negative,” Tulak sang. 

“Man, this ship is built!” Lin said. 

“Tulak, give us a hard circle and 
take her-I want to get behind them!” 

“Affirmative.” 

Dal felt the pressure begin to push 
him back into his seat. Harder, 
harder-until he couldn’t move. 

He knew that Tulak was unaffected 
by the heavy G-force. His massive 
arms would be moving with preci- 
sion, those thick fingers flitting with 
improbable softness and skill over the 
controls. 

The Revenge circled, half again as 
fast as the pursuing ships. 

“They’ve sent out a call for back- 
up!” Lin groaned. “But the base 
doesn’t seem to be sending any.” 

48 



Ha! 

The pressure eased, and Dal saw 
three ships in front of him on the 
viewers. “Stay with the one on the 
right!” 

“That’s a copy!” Lin said. He set 
the MJ computer into action. The 
deadly reefer-circuit locked onto its 
victim. The ceepee spitters roared, 
joined by a thinner laser beam. The 
fleeing ship was suspended in time, 
too slow. 

“Gotcha!” Lin said. 

The Revenge shot through the 
boiled dust and scrambled atoms of 
what had been a Lazney Lancer. 

“Seven left!” Dal said. “They’re 
re-grouping.” 

“I’m going to fire a 
cobalt-torpedo!” Lin said. 

‘ The range is too far for effective 
use,” Tulak sang. 

“Who cares? I’ve always wanted 
to use one-it’ll scare ’em!” 

Dal laughed. This was insane! And 
yet, he felt it was better to risk 
death-here, in space-than to live like 
a king on the ground! 

The computer plotted a course for 
the torpedo, and launched the killer 
missile. It roared forth from the sleek 
ship, burned through space, and- 

Did no damage, just as Tulak had 
said. But it made a nice flash. 

And it scattered the ships. That 
was good and bad. Good, because 
they were scared-they knew the Re- 
venge could out-gun any one of 
them. Bad, because it just might have 
scared them enough to come at the 
Revenge from all directions. 

It was bad, and they did! 

“Uh-oh!” Lin said. 

Then the special band on the 
transceiver burbled into life. It was 
Emba! 



GALAXY 




“She’s away! Good work! Now I 
suggest you move out-assuming 
you're still alive to hear this.” 

“You heard the man! Tulak, get 
us out of here!” 

The Revenge accelerated, faster 
and faster. Dal felt himself grow 
heavier and heavier; he watched Lin 
seem to flatten out next to him, his 
fur spreading over the ackcel couch. 

He blacked out, but he wasn’t wor- 
ried this time. The ship was whole 
the Tulak had it! 

They’d done it! 

★ 

Dal awoke to the sound of Tulak’s 
repetitive sing-song; “Approaching 
destination. Are you conscious? Ap- 
proaching destination. Are you-?” 

“Yeah, yeah! I’m awake!” 

Lin moaned. “Sister to a turd! Are 
we still alive?” 

“Yeah. Good old Tulak got us 
away!” 

“We are approaching the fifth 
planet,” Tulak intoned. 

“I still don’t know about this part, 
Dal,” Lin said, combing at his thick 
facial fur with his short claws. “Tak- 
ing on a beancan patrol with a super- 
ship like this is one thing. But this . .?’ 

“Well, so far Emba’s been on the 
beam. Maybe he’s right about this, 
too.” 

“Maybe? Snail cancer! Maybe 
could get us dead!” 

Dal shrugged. “We could still pull 
out.” 

After a few seconds, Lin shook his 
head. “I guess not. The party isn’t 
over yet.” 

“Good! Tulak, have you spotted 
the base?” 

“Affirmative. I have a fix on the 



THIS SPACE 
RESERVED FOR 
GALAXY 




We are pleased to introduce the 
Galaxy Library Organizers 
— custom designed volume bin- 
ders which will file and preserve 
up to 12 issues of your Galaxy col- 
lection. 

Each durable black and tan vinyl 
case is handsomely embossed in 
gold with the Galaxy logo. Priced 
at $4.95 each; 3 for $14, 6 for $24, 
including shipping, and handling. 
Send your check or money order 
and coupon below to: 



GALAXY 
P.O. Box 5121 
Philadelphia, Pa. 19141 

Please send me Galaxy Library 

Organizers. I have enclosed 

$ (Make payable to Jesse Jones 

Box Corp.) 

NAME 

ADDRESS 

CITY 

STATE ZIP . 

Offer good in U.S.A. only. 



STAR WARRIORS 



49 



autobeacon.” 

“Okay. Lead me in. We’re going 
down!” 

XU 

Everywhere, the thick, red ore dust 
seemed to cover things. It was a des- 
olate looking scene. Even with the 
masks, the air was barely breathea- 
ble. Dal imagined he could smell the 
taint of raw iron, could taste the me- 
tallic grit of the all-pervading dust. 
That was impossible, of course-the 
masks filtered down to viruses-but 
the sensation was strong. 

The air was too cold to take with- 
out a climate suit, even for Lincheni. 
And the Demi-Whelf bitched about 
that. The smallest suit on the Revenge 
still hung in large folds over the 
whelf’s stubby frame. 

Lin kicked at a dusty rock. Red 
powder rose in a fine mist around his 
boot. 

“A month, eh?” 

“That’s what the man said.” 

They looked around. The huge 
mining camp was devoid of life ex- 
cept for them. Hookthom had shut 
it down for good reasons. He knew 
miners were an independent lot, and 
if left alone there, they might cause 
trouble. 

Over three hundred bubble 
ships-the ore carriers-were still 
grounded at the camp, plus fifty or 
sixty smaller orbital hoppers. None 
of the craft were equipped to go Hy- 
per, so none could get away to warn 
the Confederation. But under the 
right circumstances, the bubble ships 
could be rigged into flying atomic 
bombs. Hookthom didn’t want to 
lose any of his small fleet to some 
wild-eyed miner trying to fly a sui- 

50 



cide mission against him, so he’d 
pulled everyone off the planet. 

The ships were, however, still op- 
erational. Hookthom didn’t know 
when he might require more iron, so 
he’d left them intact, should the need 
arise. 

According to Lao Emba, it was 
going to be a fatal mistake! 

“We might as well get started,” 
Dal said. 

“Yeah,” the floppy looking Lin- 
cheni said. “Even withTulak’s help, 
it’ll take me two weeks just to pro- 
gram the computer to handle it.” 

“And even then, it’s going to be 
close using Emba’s schedule. It’s 
gonna be a long month!” 

“A banker,” Lin said. 

“What?” 

“I could have been a banker. True, 
it didn’t pay much, but I had an uncle 
who was fairly high up in banking 
circles back on New London. In ten 
or fifteen years, I could have saved 
enough to breed. Maybe not the best- 
looking female, but something, at 
least!” 

“Uh, Lin . .”. 

“Crap, never mind! If we pull 
this-this-r/i/ng off, we’ll at least have 
the Revenge. We ought to be able to 
make enough with her in a couple of 
months for fifty females!” 

“Cheer up, Lin. None of us have 
been doing too well in breeding cir- 
cles these days.” 

“Well, at least we can, given the 
opportunity,” Lin said. 

“You have a point, friend, you 
have a point!” 

★ 

It was hellish work. Dal hated it. 

The stink of circuit flux was every- 

GALAXY 




where, and the thin, blue smoke 
clouded Dal’s eyes. Working on the 
tiny circuits under the magnifying 
vapor wasn’t helping his vision, either. 

He held the spot-laser’s button 
down. Bzzt. Another good circuit. 

Crap. How many more ships left 
to do? A hundred? And how long had 
it been? Three weeks? It seemed like 
three years! They’d never get them 
done in time. Even after Lin and Tu- 
lak had managed to get the computer 
on the Revenge programmed, they 
had been unable to work fast enough. 
Although Tulak could work around 
the clock. Dal and Lin had to sleep. 

He was so tired! This was exacting 
work. Dal made a mental note of an- 
other profession he’d never 
enter-electronic repair. Why’d they 
have to make the things so god- 
damned small, anyway? 

There! Another unit finished. He 
tongued the comswitch on his climate 
suit-the ships were cold, there wasn’t 
enough fuel to waste heating them-and 
called Lin. 

“How’s it going?” 

“-bastard son of a feline! Spawn 
of a-!” 

“Hey, Lin.” 

“What?” 

“I said, ‘How’s it going?’ ” 
“Like^digging through a mountain 
of offal with a teaspoon, that’s how 
it’s going!” 

“Yeah, well, keep up the good 
work!” Dal laughed. It didn’t look 
as if Lin was planning on going into 
electronics, either! 

★ 

With three days remaining before 
the expected deadline, Lao Emba 
called with a scramble coded mes- 
sage. Lin tied the code into the ship’s 
computer. 



“Tomorrow,” Emba said. 

“But we’ve still got fifty-five 
ships to finish!” Dal said. 

“Sorry. You’ll have to make do-it’s 
not my idea. A Confederation scout 
broke Hyper yesterday just long 
enough to send me a coded message. 
Tomorrow, at 0500, they’re going to 
break out in the-have you got your 
system charts?” 

Lin nodded as he put the chart on 
the comp screen. 

“Yeah.” 

“They’ll hit the area called Quee- 
chan C’enk. We-you-have got to 
have Hookthorn’s ships there by 
then.” 

You’re crazy, Dal thought. 

“You’re crazy!” Lin said, 

“Listen, if you did the circuitry as 
I outlined, it’ll work!” 

“How are things on-planet?” Dal 
asked. 

“Bad. After the Culebrath at- 
tacked the camp, Hookthom became 
even more paranoid-although in this 
case, it isn’t really paranoia. He 
clamped down hard on the populace. 
There have been purges, executions. 
While most of the Culebrath managed 
to escape after the raid, Hookthom 
has been bombing the weed fields.” 

“What about the theft of his ship?” 

“He guessed rightly on that-figured 
you took it. But fortunately he also 
thinks you were destroyed trying to 
escape.” 

“But — how?” 

“His patrol was afraid to tell him 
otherwise.” 

Lin laughed. 

“It’s lucky,” Emba continued. 
“While information pertaining as to 
who you are-ah, were, was allowed 
to fall into his hands, so he wasn’t 
worried about you running to the 



STAR WARRIORS 



51 




Confederation, it’s better this way-he 
feels safe.” 

This whole thing gets wilder all the 
time. Dal thought. 

“Gentlebeings, 1 suggest you pre- 
pare your armada for lift-off!” 

Da) looked at Lin, then at Tulak. 
Well. He supposed it wasn’t any cra- 
zier than -anything else which had 
happened! ✓ 

Within two hours, the bubble ships 
began to take off. 

Within four hours, all two hundred 
and fifty of the prepared vessels were 
in space. 

“Okay, Lin,” Dal said, feeling 
more than just a little nervous. “Let’s 
try it!” 

“You got it, chief!’’ The 
Demi-Whelf mumbled a quick 
prayer-curse, adjusted a control, and 
stroked in the program. 

Five bubble ships zipped by the 
Revenge in a tight formation. Dal 
watched them become smaller and 
smaller, until the tiny dots winked 
out and became invisible. 

“Tulak, what do you show on 
long-scan radar?” 

“Five vessels.” 

“Okay, Lin, plug ’em in!” 

Lin nodded, and touched another 
control. 

“Tulak?” 

“There are now fifty blips indi- 
cating vessels on the screen, moving 
in formation.” 

“Ha, ha!” Dal whooped. “We did 
it!” 

It worked! If all the circuits held, 
each of the nearly hollow bubble 
ships would throw ten “ghosts” 
which would be picked up by radar 
as ships. As long as they were out of 
visual range of Hookthom’s ships, 
the two hundred-odd ore carriers 
52 



would look like a fleet of twenty-five 
hundred ships! 

As long as they stayed out of visual 
range .... 

★ 

“I still don’t-” began Lin. 

“Look, Emba knows what he’s 
talking about. It’s human psychol- 
ogy. Hookthom has over four thou- 
sand ships, right?” 

“Yeah, but-” 

“So when we show up with what 
looks like twenty-five hundred and 
start making noises for him to sur- 
render, he won’t be worried, He’ll 
think we blew it-that we underesti- 
mated his strength, and don’t know 
he’s nearly two to one stronger than 
’our ’fleet.’ ” 

“So? I still-” 

“Look, he has to flame up and 
destroy us, before we can get away 
and get help. And since the odds are 
so much in his favor, he’ll figure to 
make short work of us.” 

“That part I understand. He won’t 
have a hell of a lot of trouble doing 
it, once he finds out that instead of 
a couple thousand ships-of-the-line 
all we have is two hundred and fifty 
weaponless rock haulers.” 

“Right! Except that the Confeds 
are brave but not stupid. Once 
they-we-see we’re outnumbered, 
everybody beats a strategic retreat, 
coincidentally into the Queechan 
C’enk region, where the real Confeds 
jump him!” 

“Fools and morons,” Lin mut- 
tered. 

“What?” 

“Nothing. The Confeds jump 
him.” 

“Right. And they will outnumber 
GALAXY 




him three to one. Any ships he leaves 
behind on-planet will pick up the 
drift pretty quickly and hault for Hy- 
per! ’ ’ 

“And everybody lives happily ever 
after,” Lin mumbled under his breath. 
“Excuse me?” 

“Nothing, nothing! Just an old 
whelf proverb.” 

“It’s a simple, direct plan.” 

“You know,” Lin said, “if we 
stopped to think about this for a min- 
ute, we’d probably realize how im- 
possible it all is.” 

“Yeah, I know,” Dal admitted. 
“So don’t stop to think about it.” 

XIII 

“Units eighteen and nineteen, close 
up!” Dal said. 

“Yes, sir!’’ came Lin's 
pre-recorded voice from one of the 
bubble ships. 

“Units forty-one through 
forty-seven, initiate formation ‘L.’” 
“Affirmative, Commander.” That 
was Tulak’s sing-song-it wouldn’t 
hurt to let them think they had a few 
Trogian robots on hand. 

“You think they're getting this?” 
Lin asked. 

“They ought to be-hell, we’re 
bleeding all over two of their main 
bands.” 

“Gonna send the ultimatum now?” 
“Not yet. After one of his patrols 
pick us up and reports.” 

“Then we run?” 

“Don’t worry about that! Just 
make sure you keep the ‘fleet’ out of 
line of sight of the planet-we don’t 
want some astronomer accidentally 
noticing us!” 

“There it is! Listen!” 
“-approaching ships number over 

STAR WARRIORS 



two thousand. Urgent, repeat, ur- 
gent! We have sensor contact with a 
fleet of over two thousand ships. 
Alert status! Alert!” 

“That ought to do it,” Lin said. 

“Okay.” Dal took a deep breath. 
“Here goes! 

“Attention Planet Cynthia Dianne! 
This is Fleet Commander Rockwall 
of the Confederation of Man!” 

“Rockwall?” Lin whispered. 

Dal clicked off his comset and 
shrugged. “Might as well sound 
tough.” He clicked the com back on. 

“Attention Lord Kreeg Hook- 
thom! We know you have established 
a base on this planet. You are ordered 
to surrender or be destroyed!” 

Give up, you crazy bastard, or me 
and my two hundred and fifty ping- 
pong balls will blow you away. Sure. 

“Okay, Lin, they should have had 
time to count us on their fingers by 
now. What’s happening?” 

“Enemy ships lifting,” Tuiak cut 
in. ‘ ‘The count is eight hundred units, 
nine hundred, thirteen-” 

“Uh, Dal . .?” 

“I heard! Let’s get the hell out of 
here!” 

The Revenge circled, and Lincheni 
began sending signals to the bubble 
ships to retreat. 

Behind them, Hookthom’s forces 
flared away from the planet in attack 
formation. 

“I sure hope the Confed’s chronos 
aren’t slow-” Lin began. 

"Don’t even think it!” 

★ 

Just ahead lay the deep-space re- 
gion of the C’enk. 

Behind, according to Tuiak, 
thirty-eight hundred ships were fol- 
lowing. 

.53 




Almost there, almost! 

“Enemy ships coming within vis- 
ual range,” Tulak said. 

“Damn! Where the hell are the 
lousy-?” 

“There went ten of our primar- 
ies!” Lin said. 

Blap! A hundred ships at one 
whack! Hookthom’s men must be 
patting themselves on the back, tell- 
ing each other what great marksmen 
they were. 

“Come on, come on!” 

“Eight more, no, make that twelve 
more ships gone!” 

A hundred and twenty more of the 
‘fleet’ down the tube. 

Thud! The Revenge rattled and 
slued as the silent form of a Confed- 
eration Tong fighter zapped from 
Hyper less than fifty kilometers away. 

Then another Confed ship mater- 
ialized! Another! A dozen, a hundred! 

“Yahoo! The sons o’ bitches made 
it!” Lin screamed. 

“Tulak, how many bubble ships 
do we have left?” 

“Ninety four. Ninety one.” 

“Lin, blow those suckers!” 

Lin tapped a control tab. Ninety- 
one empty ore carriers suddenly be- 
came ninety-one atomic explosions. 
“How many did we get?” 

“Sixty nine!” Lin said. 

Well! Not bad for ping-pong balls! 
“This place is getting very 
crowded!” Dal said. “Let’s move!” 
Around them, Confederation ships 
continued to wink into normal space. 
The battle was joined! 

All around them, the black curtain 
of space was being almost constantly 
lit by exploding ships and energy 
beams. Even with the viewers on full 
polarization, the glare was nearly 
blinding. 

54 



Dal aimed the Revenge toward the 
fleet of Hookthorn’s lancers. Two of 
the ships came into range. 

“Get ’em, Lin!” 

Lincheni’s hands made love to the 
computer’s controls. Ceepee beams 
shot out, lasers hummed forth, cobalt 
torpedoes streaked away! 

The lancers returned the fire. The 
Revenge shuddered, but her screens 
held; 

And the lancers flared and van- 
ished into nothingness. 

“Go, Lin!” 

“Four enemy ships approaching 
from the rear,” Tulak sang. 

“On the viewer!” 

“Hang on!” Dal’s fingers stroked 
the cool plastic controls; he felt the 
blood rush from his head as the ship 
accelerated and curved upward. 

“They’ve split into two groups!” 

“Going after the closest ones!” 
Dal yelled. 

The ceepee cannons blasted at the 
two ships, and-missed! 

“Lin? What the hell?” 

A burned smell filled the cabin. 

“I’ve got a blow-out on the pri- 
mary firing and tracker circuit!” 

“Switch the mother to secondary 
before those bastards-!” 

Clang! The Revenge bounced. Dal’s 
comspeaker jammed hard into his lips 
and teeth, "v 

“Damage to the rear shield,” Tu- 
lak sang unemotionally. “Primary 
circuit out, secondary back-up 
down-going to tertiary.” 

“Lin!” 

“Secondary fire controls locked 
on!” 

Dal guided the ship around in a 
tighter circle, heading toward the 
starboard side of two of the lancers. 

“Shoot, you hairy fairy, shoot!” 



GALAXY 




Ceepee flared, found the two ships. 

“Got ’em!” 

“What about the other two?” 

“They’ve got problems of their 
own. Four Tong fighters are on their 
tails!” 

“Great!” Dal grinned. 

“Uh-oh!” 

“Now what?” 

“We’ve got two Tongs on us, 
too!” 

“What? The idiots!” Dal flicked 
on his comset. “Hey, assholes! Can’t 
you see we’re on y our side?” 

The seat restraints cut into his 
shoulders and thighs as the screens 
opaqued black from a direct ceepee 
hit. 

“The stupid fuckers are shooting 
at us!” 

“We’re in Blackthorn’s ship!” Lin 
rasped, fumbling with his controls. 

“Crap!” 

Now what were they going to do? 
They had had a lot of hassles with 
the Confederation already-if they 
shot down a few Tong fighters! 

On the other hand, they couldn’t 
let the stupid Tongs shoot them 
down, either! 

The Revenge jumped again as an- 
other blast knocked her sideways and 
forward! 

“Tertiary circuit on rear shield is 
down,” Tulak said. “The shield is 
now inoperative.” 

“Tulak! Get us out of here!” 

The Revenge leaped forward, leav- 
ing the slower Tongs behind. 

“Now what?” Lin asked. “Every- 
body is shooting at us!” 

“Time to go! They don’t need us. 
We’ll just warp into Hyper and get 
the hell out of-” 

“Negative,” Tulak said. “The last 
attack disabled the shifter. We cannot 

STAR WARRIORS 



go into Hyperspace.” 

Oh, fine! “Okay, so we run in 
normal space. We’ve still got more 
speed than any of those canaries. 
We’ll go darkside and find a hole to 
crawl into. Tulak!” 

The pressure increased, spreading 
Dal’s cheeks and lips. 

“Tulak . she’s . yours!” 

“Affirmative.” 

This was really getting to be old. 
Dal thought, just before he blacked 
out again .... 

★ 

The screaming was so shrill he 
thought it would burst his eardrums! 
He recognized the tone-Tulak’s “A” 
above high “C.” 

“Shut the hell up!” The tone 
ceased, but Dal’s ears still rang. 

The forward-port viewers showed 
nightside of the planet Cynthia Dianne, 
and everything looked quiet. 

Wait! 

“Hey, Lin! Wake up! Lin!” 

“Wh-what?” the whelf grumbled 
irritably. 

“Company! Coming up fast!” 

Lincheni looked at the scanner, 
then his computer screen. “What 
kind of ship can do that kind of 
speed?” 

“The craft is a Styne-Alison 
fighter,” Tulak said. 

Whoops. Dal’s mind tried to focus 
on that fact over the ringing in his 
ears. I wonder who’s in-? 

“Hookthom!” Dal and Lin said 
together. It had to be! They should 
have known he’d have another ship 
stashed somewhere. He was too smart 
to get caught unprepared for his per- 
sonal survival, regardless of what 
happened to his navy. 



55 




Dal’s mind scrabbled over itself, 
trying to think rationally. 

“Lin, the weaponry?” 

“We’ve got ceepee and some 
laser-no mines, no torpedoes.” 
“Tulak, the engines?” 

“Normal space drive functioning. 
Hyper shifters are out.” 

“And the screens?” 

“Rear screens are out. Both lateral 
screens are on secondary. Front 
screens still on primary.” 

Bad news! They were- partially 
crippled. Hookthorn’s ship would be 
fully armed and intact. And he’d have 
a lot more space-time than Dal did 
in this kind of ship. 

They ought to run-it would be the 
smartest thing. They’d done their 
part! 

And yet ... 

If Hookthom got away, he’d start 
over again, on some other world, 
trying to build a new force, trying his 
maniacal attempts at galactic rule. 
There’d be another war someday. 
They had to do something! 

They had to stop him. 

Maybe they could bluff! Dal 
switched on his comset. “Hook- 
thom! Give it up! Your fleet's being 
destroyed. You haven’t got a chance!” 
“You! I should have killed you 
before!” 

“It’s too late, Hookthom! You’ve 
lost!” 

“Like hell! They might have got- 
ten my fleet, but I’ll get you before 
I go!” His transmission clicked off, 
and the approaching ship flipped into 
an attack arc toward the Revenge. 
Well. So much for bluffing! 

Dal’s hands sweated as he spun his 
own ship into a spiral toward the on- 
coming vessel. He couldn’t let Hook- 
thorn get behind him, not with the 

56 




shields down in back. He’d have to 
meet him head-on! But things looked 
bad. 

“Dal, he’s got us outgunned!” 
“You heard Tulak-the CM A shields 
are down! If we run, we’ll damn sure 
get killed!” 

Lin said nothing. 

“But we do have one advantage. 
Tulak can take higher G’s. We can 
out-fly him!” 

“But Tulak can’t shoot! What hap- 
pens if we pass out?” 

“We’ll worry about-” 

Clang! Metal screeched inside the 
Revenge as the two ships tore past 
each other, hurling eerie 
green-and-red lances of ceepee and 
laser across the blackness of the 
screened hulls. 

“Starboard screen now on ter- 
tiary,” Tulak said. 

“Get us around before he comes 

GALAXY 



back!” Dal shouted. “If he gets to 
us on the right or rear, we’re dead!” 

Dal fought unconsciousness as the 
Revenge jerked, too fast for a human 
pilot. Don’t let go now! 

There! Hookthom, moving slower, 
was still turning. 

“Go . Tulak . hard!” 

The Revenge streaked for the other 
ship, ceepee cannons spraying their 
deadly particles. A hit! 

“His . , screens . are-are- 
holding!” Lin said with a gasp. 

Then Hookthom’s ship was head- 
ing for them again, nose-to-nose. 

Dal fought to move his leaden fin- 
gers. They had to slide to starboard, 
had to take the next shots on the port 
side. 

Like ancient warriors on some 
more ancient steeds, the two ships 
passed each other, again, thrusting 
with terrible energies! 

“Port shields holding on second- 
ary.” 

Something, at least! 

“Bring us around again! Goose 
it!” 

The blackness crawled around the 
edges of his mind. Dal fought it-fought 
it- 

And lost. 

He awoke with Lin slapping his 
face with the back of a hairy paw. 
“Sleep later. Dal! We’re on his tail!” 

Dal dragged himself from the brink 
of darkness in his head and stared. 
There! They were behind Hookthorn! 

“Give it everything we’ve got, 
Lin!” 

“What the hell do you think I’m 
doing?” Two furry crabs scuttled 
across the gunnery circuit switches, 
telling the computer to shoot, shoot, 
shoot! 

Pop! A blue spark flashed from the 
STAR WARRIORS 



comp control board! 

“Piss! The secondary’s gone!” 
The Revenge’s ceepee cannons 
winked out, the lasers died! 

Ahead, Hookthom’s ship curved 
away. 

“Damn!” 

Another flash from Lin’s board! 
There was that burned-flux smell Dal 
knew too well! He twisted to look at 
Lin. 

“That’s it! The tertiary blew! We’ve 
lost computer gunnery!” 

“How about manual?” 

“Manual? I can’t out-shoot a com- 
puter with manual!” 

“You’d better try!” 

“Dal, 1 ” 

“Pretend you’re a computer! But 
if you don’t do something, we are 
going to get-Hey! Where’d he go?” 
Boom! A roar vibrated through the 
ship. The control cabin suddenly 
seemed filled with fragments of torn 
metal. Thin sections of shattered alu- 
minum extrusion whizzed through 
the room like arrows! 

Dal felt a sudden burn in his right 
shoulder-a five-centimeter-long sec- 
tion of jagged metal, half a centi- 
meter thick, stuck from his deltoid! 
“Lin? Are you all right?” 

The Demi-Whelf pulled at one of 
his thin ears-a notch had been cut 
from it by a fragment of sharp 
metal-otherwise, he seemed okay. 
“Tulak!” There was no answer. 
Dal pulled at his comset-and found 
another bit of shattered metal shard 
piercing the tiny circuit box-his 
headset was dead. 

“Lin!” 

“Tulak’s okay-but he says we 
took a direct hit on our number-three 
engine-it’s out!” 

Lin reached over and tugged at the 

57 




aluminum strip which protnided from 
Dal’s shoulder. It came out with a 
small sucking noise, and a little blood 
seeped with it-not much. 

“Don’t worry about that! Hook- 
thorn’s behind us!” 

“Yeah. Good-bye, Dal, it was 
nice-” 

“Stuff it! We’re not dead yet!” 

But Dal knew it was going to be 
a matter of only a few seconds if he 
didn’t do something. Only what? 
With two engines, there was no way 
they could out-run him. The rear 
shield was down, they had no 
mines-there wasn’t anything they 
could- 

“Wait! Dal jerked Lin’s comset 
from the whelf’s head. 

“Hey, what-?” 

“Tulak! Tulak, kill the engines! 
Do it now!” 

“Dal!” Lin yelled. “Are you 
crazy?” 

“Do it Tulak! Quick!” 

Dal felt himself push against the 
restraints as the big Trogian robot cut 
the power to the two remaining en- 
gines. 

And Hookthom’s ship burned past, 
just missing the vastly slowed Re- 
venge! 

A stall— the oldest trick in the 
book-and it had worked! 

“Okay, Tulak! Give it everything 
she’s got left! Lin, start shooting!” 

“We’ll never catch him with only 
two engines!” 

“You want to wait for him to come 
back? Go!” 

Lin started the ceepees blasting 
manually. The thin green beams be- 
gan to track the shrinking ship, slowly, 
slowly. 

“Come on, come on, come on!” 

“We’ve got you now, you bas- 



tard!” 

“Tong fighters approaching,” Tu- 
lak sang. 

“Oh, shit!” 

Lin glanced up. “What?” 

“Never mind! Shoot!” 

But it was too late. As they watched, 
Hookthom’s ship veered away for 
deep space and accelerated. Ab- 
ruptly, the golden flare of its engines 
vanished, as it winked into Hyper. 

“Gone! The lousy son of a bitch 
got away!” 

“Fighters closing rapidly,” Tulak 
said. 

Lin looked at his screen. “Hey, 
we’ve got company!” 

“Yeah. Tulak told me.” 

“Now what are we going to do?” 
Dal sighed. “We’d better run up 
the white flag. Send out a surren- 
der.” 

Lin twisted a control. “Uh . .” 
“ ‘Uh?’ What ‘Uh?’ ” 

“The extra-ship transmitter is out!” 
Dal clenched his fists! “Dammit! 
Why do these things happen?” 
“Enemy fighters coming within-” 
“I heard, I heard! Can we outrun 
’em?” 

“Possibly.” 

“Possibly? What the hell does that 
mean?” Dal shook his head. Some- 
how, this seemed very familiar. 

“With two engines remaining, we 
are still slightly faster; however . .” 
“What? What?” 

“The attacking craft will soon 
come within firing range if we at- 
tempt to outrun them in deep space.” 
Well, damn! That left-oh, no! 
“Take us down to the planet!” Dal 
said. 

“Oh, no!” Lin said. 

“Better idea?” 

Lin shook his head. 



58 



GALAXY 




The Tongs began to close in, and 
Dal felt the now-familiar pressure of 
too much gravity mashing him. His 
mouth pulled open into a toothy gri- 
mace. and his arms became lead 
weights, a hundred kilos each, it felt 
like. 

Circuits in Lincheni’s computer 
board flared and burned, and vile 
stink poured from the board in waves 
of gray-black-white smoke. 

Emergency sirens screamed, but 
their sound began to fade. 

Crashing into this damned planet 
was getting to be a habit. Dal thought, 
just like blacking out. 

XIV 

The first thing Dal heard when he 
came to was Lin, practicing a curse 
at the top of his obviously unharmed 
lungs. 

“Rotten dog eating fraad sniffers! 
Sons of pith-carriers! Turtle 
-balling-!” 

“Hey, knock all that noise off! My 
head hurts enough already!” 

“You all right?” Lin asked. 

Aside from the cut on his shoulder 
and contusions and a few pulled mus- 
cles, Dal couldn’t find any major 
damage. “Yeah. I’m okay.” 

“Good!” Lin resumed cursing. 

★ 

Dal looked around. They were out- 
side of the ruined ship. To his left, 
Tulak surveyed the jungle calmly, the 
dim blue light filtering from his near- 
featureless face almost invisible in 
the tropical sunshine. 

The Revenge looked to be in worse 
shape than the Starbird did after her 
crash landing-that was two ships 



he’d piled up to rot in the jungle! 

Lin finally ran down, out of breath. 
He turned to Dal. “1 hate to sound 
like a cliche, but isn’t this where we 
came in?” 

Dal nodded. “Almost. Only we’re 
a little better off this time!” 

“Oh? How do you figure that ?” 
“This time we’re going to look up 
a certain old man and a pretty female 
senator. They owe us a ship!” 
“What about the Confeds? They 
won’t exactly welcome us with open 
arms. I can’t remember exactly how 
many charges they want us on.” 
“Thirty-six,” Tulak interrupted. 
“Yeah, thanks, but what do you-?” 
Dal managed a sore-lipped grin. 
“So what’s a few Confeds to 
someone who took on an entire navy 
with a few empty ore-carriers?” 

Lin returned the grin. “Well. You 
do have a point!” 

“One other thing. After we get that 
ship, there’s a certain Lord Hook- 
thorn I think we ought to look up, 
too. I figure he owes us something!” 
Lin swatted a bug trying to nest in 
his thick chest fur. 

“Well,” he said with a sigh, “1 
guess the female whelves on New 
London can wait one more season.” 
They both laughed, while Tulak 
gleamed silently in the setting tropi- 
cal sun. 

— Jesse Peel 



PUNKWORLD 

Next Issue 
SUBSCRIBE 



STAR WARRIORS 



59 




HOLLYWOOD — This coming summer, many of the most important re- 
leases from the major distributors will be science fiction and/or fantasy. 
At the end of 1 978, the following were among the films announced as 
1 979 summer releases. 

NIGHTWING. This is an occult suspenser centering on American 
Indian superstitions, and as part of a medicine man’s curse, hordes of 
vampire bats swarm out of caverns to attack people. From the novel. 

THE RAVAGERS. Another post — holocaust movie, starring Richard 
Harris. This was produced by Saul David, who so generously gave us 
FANTASTIC VOYAGE and LOGAN’S RUN. It’s apparent to me that 
these after — the — bomb pictures are merely going over ground covered 
so much better in SF novels long ago. 

Steven Spielberg has been authorized to add a few scenes to CLOSE 
ENCOUNTERS OF THE THIRD KIND for its general rerelease in the 
summer. And his next film, 1941, will also apparently be essentially a 
fantasy; more special effects than in CE3K are promised for this fantasy 
of the Japanese non-invasion of California. 

PROPHECY. John Frankenheimer's hush — hush anti — pollution 
shocker. One source described it as an ecologically — minded CREA- 
TURE FROM THE BLACK LAGOON, with pollution — spawned mutants 
menacing mankind. 

ALIEN will be out this summer. This will probably be the big SF 
release of 1979; at least, I don’t know of any other as significant. The 
script is by Ron Shusett and Dan O’Bannon, and deals with a 
man — eating monster loose aboard a spaceship. The design of the film 
is largely the result of artists trained in comic-strip work, including Moei- 
bus and Ron Cobb. 



60 



(Continued on page 62) 






NEW YORK — As a special feature each issue of SF HOTLINE will 
present an in-depth look at one author’s forthcoming work. 

The first author to be so featured is Jack Williamson. The dean of 
SF authors, Mr. Williamson has been writing SF since 1 929. In his half- 
a-century of production he has pioneered such innovative concepts as 
countraterrane matter, and given the SF field such remarkable books 
as THE HUMANOIDS, THE LEGION OF SPACE, DARKER THAN YOU 
THINK, SEETEE SHOCK and his most recent book, THE POWER OF 
BLACKNESS. So it is with great pleasure that I report the following: 

A new book, BROTHER TO DEMONS, BROTHER TO GODS, out 
this spring from Bobbs-Merriil. 

A sequel to THE HUMANOIDS, entitled TEN TRILLION WISE MA- 
CHINES, due from Bantam. 

A new Legion Of Space novel, QUEEN OF THE LEGION, coming 
from Pocket Books. 

A sequel, written in collaboration with Frederik Pohl, to THE FAR- 
THEST STAR (which appeared in GALAXY in 1974 under the title 
ORGS’ EGG), which has been planned and the rights sold to Del Rey 
Books. The tentative title is WALL AROUND A STAR. 

RUMORS to the contrary, Playboy Publications is not currently plan- 
ning a competition magazine to Penthouse's Omni. Playboy New Pub- 
lications Editor Mod Perski called such rumors totally incorrect and 
without any basis in fact. 

Marion Zimmer Bradley has a new novel out from Doubleday titled 
THE HOUSE BETWEEN THE WORLDS. 

Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle have done a "rationale” for a Buck 

(Continued on page 88) 

61 



(Continued from page 60) 

THE HUMANOID stars Richard Kiel (“Jaws” of THE SPY WHO 
LOVED ME) as a superhuman hero of a future world. This Italian — U.S. 
coproduction was partly filmed in Israel. 

METEOR is the long — in — production epic of a science-fiction dis- 
aster. A huge meteor swarm is heading for the Earth, and it’s up to 
free — world scientist Sean Connery and Soviet Natalie Wood to stop 
it. I predict the film will not be any great shakes, despite its great cost, 
good cast (which also includes Brian Keith and Henry Fonda) and lavish 
effects. This is because there are too many compromises at work on 
the script and the film; American International, which is producing the 
film, always seems to want to make their biggest films appeal to every- 
one at once, and they generally end up appealing to no one. 

C.H.O.M.P.S. is apparently about a robot dog. Since the top dogs 
at AIP don't usually exert as much control over their lower— budget 
films as they do over the more expensive ones, the cheaper films are 
less compromised and often more watchable; it might turn out that 
C.H.O.M.P.S. is better than METEOR. 

THE SHAPE OF THINGS TO COME has been announced as a 
remake of H.G. Wells' THINGS TO COME, but it’s probably going to 
more strongly resemble another STAR WARS imitation; a cute robot 
has been added to the cast, which includes Jack Palance. It’s produced 
by Harry Alan Towers, who has almost never done anything in his entire 
career that’s worth watching. 

The new version of DRACULA, starring Frank Langella, Laurence 
Olivier and Donald Pleasence, will also be out in the summer. It’s elab- 
orate and expensive, but since it’s based on the creaky old Balder- 
ston — Deane play, I fear for the quality of the script. 

SPACEPORT is to be produced by Max Keller from a script by Glen 
Benest and Matthew Barr. TERROR ON MAD DOG ISLAND, which is 
announced as science fiction, is set for a $3.5 million budget (but I 
doubt it), produced by Brad Marks and written by Sidney Leveille. 

Of course, the Hugo for 1 979 will probably go to Kubrick’s THE SHIN- 
ING. He’s made three fantastic films before, and won the Hugo each 
time. There's no reason to doubt he’ll do it again. 

— Bill Warren 



HOT FOR HOTLINE NEWS? 
SUBSCRIBE TODAY! 



62 



GALAXY 





i. 

Haviland Tuf was relaxing in an 
alehouse on Tamber when the thin 
man found him. He sat by himself in 
the darkest corner of the dimly lit tav- 
ern, his elbows resting on the table, 
his bald head almost brushing the low 
wooden beam above. Four empty 
mugs sat before him, insides streaked 
by rings of foam, while a fifth, half- 
full, was cradled in huge, calloused 
hands. 

If Tuf was aware of the curious 
glances the other patrons gave him 
from time to time, he showed no sign; 
he quaffed his ale methodically, and 
his face-bone-white and completely 
hairless, as was the rest of him-was 
without expression. He was a man of 
heroic dimensions, a giant with an 
equally gigantic paunch, and made 
a singular figure drinking alone in his 
booth. 

Although he was not quite alone; 
his black tomcat Dax lay asleep on 



the table, a ball of dark fur, and Tuf 
would occasionally set down his mug 
of ale and idly stroke his quiet com- 
panion. Dax would not stir from his 
comfortable position among the empty 
mugs. The cat was fully as large, 
compared to other cats, as Haviland 
Tuf, compared to other men. 

When the thin man came up to 
Tuf’s booth, Tuf said nothing at all. 
He merely looked up, and blinked, 
and waited for the other to begin. 

“You are Haviland Tuf, the ani- 
mal-seller,” the man said. He was 
painfully thin. His garments, all black 
leather and grey fur, hung loose on 
him, bagging here and there. Yet he 
was plainly a man of some means, 
since he wore a thin brass coronet 
around his brow, under a mop of 
black hair, and his fingers were all 
adorned with rings. 

Tuf stroked Dax, and-looking down 
at the cat-began to speak. “Did you 
hear that, Dax?” he said. He spoke 



A BEAST FOR NORN 



63 



very slowly, his voice a deep bass 
with only a hint of inflection. “1 am 
Haviland Tuf, the animal-seller. Or 
so I am taken to be.” Then he looked 
up at the thin man who stood impa- 
tiently. “Sir,” he said. “1 am indeed 
Haviland Tuf. And 1 do indeed trade 
in animals. Yet perhaps 1 do not con- 
sider myself an animal-seller. Per- 
haps I consider myself an ecological 
engineer.” 

The thin man waved his hand in 
an irritated gesture, and slid unin- 
vited into the booth opposite Tuf. 
“I understand that you own a seed- 
ship of the ancient Ecological Corps, 
but that does not make you an eco- 
logical engineer, Tuf. They are all 
dead, and have been for centuries. 
But if you prefer to be called an eco- 
logical engineer, then well and good. 
I require your services. I want to buy 
a monster from you, a great fierce 
beast.” 

“Ah,” said Tuf, to the cat again. 
“He wants to buy a monster, this 
stranger who seats himself at my ta- 
ble.” 

“My name is Herold Nom, if that 
is what’s bothering you,” the thin 
man said. “I am the Senior Beast- 
Master of my House, one of the 
Twelve Great Houses of Lyronica.” 

“Lyronica,” Tuf stated. “I have 
heard of Lyronica. The next world 
out from here towards the Fringe, is 
it not? Esteemed for its gaming 
pits?” 

Nom smiled. “Yes, yes,” he said. 

Haviland Tuf scratched Dax be- 
hind the ear, a peculiar rhythmic 
scratch, and the tomcat slowly un- 
curled, yawning, and glanced up at 
the thin man. A wave of reassurance 
came flooding into Tuf; the visitor 
was well-intentioned and truthful, it 

64 



seemed. According to Dax. All cats 
have a touch of psi. Dax had more 
than a touch; the genetic wizards of 
the vanished Ecological Corps had 
seen to that. He was Tut s mind- 
reader. 

“The affair becomes clearer,” Tuf 
said. “Perhaps you would care to 
elaborate, Herold Norn?” 

Norn nodded. “Certainly, cer- 
tainly. What do you know of Lyron- 
ica? Particularly of the gaming pits ?” 

Tuf s heavy, stark-white face re- 
mained emotionless. “Small things. 
Perhaps not enough, if I am to deal 
with you. Tell me what you will, and 
Dax and I will consider the matter.” 

Herold Nom rubbed thin hands to- 
gether, and nodded again. “Dax?” 
he said. “Oh, your cat. A handsome 
animal, although personally I have 
never been fond of beasts who cannot 
fight. Real beauty lies in killing- 
strength, I always say.” 

“A peculiar attitude,” Tuf com- 
mented. 

“No, no,” said Nom, “not at all. 
I hope your work here has not in- 
fected you with Tamberkin squeam- 
ishness.” 

Tuf drained his mug in silence, 
signaled for two more. The barkeep 
brought them promptly. 

“Thank you, thank you,” Nom 
said when the mug was set, golden 
and foaming, in front of him. 

“Proceed.” 

“Yes. Well, the Twelve Great 
Houses of Lyronica compete in the 
gaming pits, you know. It began-oh, 
centuries ago. Before that, the Houses 
warred. This way is much better. 
Family honor is upheld, fortunes are 
made, and no one is injured. You see, 
each House controls great tracts, scat- 
tered widely over the planet, and 

GALAXY 




since the land is very thinly settled, 
animal life teems. The lords of the 
Great Houses, many years ago during 
a time of peace, started to have ani- 
mal-fights. It was a pleasant diver- 
sion, rooted deep in history-you are 
aware, maybe, of the ancient custom 
of cock-fighting and the Old Earth 
folk called Romans who would set 
all manner of strange beasts against 
each other in their great arena?” 
Norn paused and drank ale, wait- 
ing for an answer, but Tuf stroked a 
quietly alert Dax and said nothing. 

“No matter,” the thin Lyronican 
finally said, wiping foam from mouth 
with the back of his hand. “That was 
the beginning of the sport. Each 
House had its own particular land, its 
own particular animals. The House 
of Varcour, for example, sprawls in 
the hot, swampy south, and they are 
fond of sending huge lizard-lions to 
the gaming pits. Feridian, a moun- 
tainous realm, has bred and cham- 
pioned its fortunes with a species of 
rock-ape which we call, naturally, 
feridians. My own house, Norn, 
stands on the grassy plains of the 
large northern continent. We have 
sent a hundred different beasts into 
combat in the pits, but we are most 
famed for our ironfangs.” 
“Ironfangs,” Tuf said. 

Nom gave a sly smile. “Yes,” he 
said proudly. “As Senior Beast-Mas- 
ter, I have trained thousands. They 
are lovely animals! Tall as you, with 
fur of a marvelous blue-black color, 
fierce and relentless.” 

“Canine?” 

“But such canines,” Nom said. 
“Yet you require a monster.” 
Nom drank more of his ale. “In 
truth, in truth. Folks from a dozen 
near worlds voyage to Lyronica, to 

A BEAST FOR NORN 



watch the beasts fight in the gaming 
pits and gamble on the outcome. Par- 
ticularly they flock to the Bronze 
Arena that has stood for six hundred 
years in the City of All Houses. 
That’s where the greatest fights are 
fought. The wealth of our Houses and 
our world has come to depend on this. 
Without it, rich Lyronica would be 
as poor as the farmers of Tamber.” 

“Yes,” said Tuf. 

“But you understand, this wealth, 
it goes to the Houses according to 
their honor, according to their vic- 
tories. The House of Ameth has 
grown greatest and most powerful 
because of the many deadly beasts in 
their varied lands; the others rank 
according to their scores in the Bronze 
Arena. The income from each 
match — all the monies paid by those 
who watch and bet — goes to the vic- 
tor.” 

Haviland Tuf scratched Dax be- 
hind the ear again. “The House of 
Nom ranks last and least among the 
Twelve Great Houses of Lyronica,” 
he said, and the twinge that Dax re- 
layed told him he was correct. 

“You know,” Nom said. 

“Sir. It was obvious. But is it eth- 
ical to buy an offworld monster, un- 
der the rules of your Bronze Arena?’ ’ 

“There are precedents. Some sev- 
enty-odd standard years ago, a gam- 
bler came from Old Earth with a 
creature called a timber wolf. The 
House of Colin backed him, in a fit 
of madness. His poor beast was 
matched against a Nom ironfang, and 
proved far from equal to its task. 
There are other cases as well. 

“In recent years, unfortunately, 
our ironfangs have not bred well. The 
wild species has all but died out on 
the plains, and the few who remain 



65 




become swift and elusive, difficult 
for our housemen to capture. In the 
breeding kennels, the strain seems to 
have softened, despite my efforts and 
those of the Beast-Masters before me. 
Nom has won few victories of late, 
and 1 will not remain Senior for long 
unless something is done. We grow 
poor. When I heard that a seedship 
had come to Tamber, then 1 deter- 
mined to seek you out. I will begin 
a new era of glory for Nom, with 
your help.” 

Haviland Tuf sat very still. “I, 
comprehend. Yet I am not in the habit 
of selling monsters. The Ark is a seed- 
ship, designed by the Earth Imperials 
thousands of years ago, to decimate 
the Hrangans through ecowar. I can 
unleash a thousand diseases, and 
have cloning material for beasts from 
more worlds than you can count. You 
misunderstand the nature of ecowar, 
however. The deadliest enemies are 
not large predators, but tiny insects 
that lay waste to a world’s crops, or 
hoppers that breed and breed and 
crowd out all other life.” 

Herold Nom looked crestfallen. 
“You have, nothing?” 

Tuf stroked Dax. “Little. A mil- 
lion types of insects, a hundred thou- 
sand kinds of small birds, as many 
fish. But monsters only a few-a 
thousand perhaps. They were used 
from time to time, for psychological 
reasons as often as not.” 

“A thousand monsters!" Norn 
was excited again. “That is more 
than enough! Surely, among that 
thousand we can find a beast for 
Norn!” 

“Perhaps,” Tuf said. “Do you 
think so, Dax?” he said to his cat. 
“Do you? So!” He looked at Nom 
again. “This matter does inteiest me, 

66 



Herold Nom. And my work here is 
done, as 1 have given the Tamberkin 
a bird that will check their rootworm 
plague, and the bird does well. So 
Dax and I will take the Ark to Ly- 
ronica, and your gaming pits, and 
will decide what is to be done with 
them.” 

Nom smiled. “Excellent,” he said. 
“Then I will buy this round.” And 
Dax told Haviland Tuf in silence that 
the thin man was flush with the feel 
of victory. 

2 . 

The Bronze Arena stood in the cen- 
ter of the City of All Houses, at the 
point where sectors dominated by the 
Twelve Great Houses met like slices 
in a pie. Each section of the rambling 
stone city was walled off, each flew 
a flag with distinctive colors, each 
had its own ambience and style; but 
all met in the Bronze Arena. 

The Arena was not bronze after all, 
but black stone and polished wood. 
It bulked up, taller than all but a few 
of the city’s scattered towers and 
minarets, topped by a shining bronze 
dome that gleamed with the orange 
rays of sunset. Gargoyles peered 
from narrow windows, carved of 
stone and hammered from bronze and 
wrought iron Great doors in the 
black stone walls were also fashioned 
of metal, and there were twelve, each 
facing a different sector of the City 
of All Houses. The colors and the 
etching on each gateway were dis- 
tinctive to its House. 

Lyronica’s sun was a fist of red 
flame smearing the horizon when 
Herold Nom led Haviland Tuf to the 
games. The housemen had just fired 
gas torches, metal obelisks that stood 

GALAXY 




like dark teeth in a ring about the 
Bronze Arena, and the hulking an- 
cient building was surrounded by 
flickering pillars of blue and orange 
flame. In a crowd of gamblers and 
gamesters, Tuf followed Herold Norn 
from the half-deserted streets of the 
Nornic slums down a path of crushed 
rock, passing between twelve bronze 
ironfangs who snarled and spit in 
timeless poses on either side of the 
street, and then through the wide 
Norn Gate whose doors were intricate 
ebony and brass. The uniformed 
guards, clad in the same black leather 
and grey fur as Herold Nom, rec- 
ognized the Beast-Master and ad- 
mitted them; others stopped to pay 
with coins of gold and iron. 

The Arena was the greatest gaming 
pit of all: the sandy combat-floor 
sunk deep below ground level, with 
stone walls four meters high sur- 
rounding it. Then the seats began, 
atop the walls, circling and circling 
in ascending tiers to the doors. Enough 
seating for thirty thousand, although 
those towards the back had a poor 
view, and other seats were blocked 
by iron pillars. Betting stalls were 
scattered throughout the building, 
windows in the outer walls. 

Herold Nom took Tuf to the best 
seats in the Arena, in front of the 
Nom section, with only a stone par- 
apet separating them from the 
four-meter drop to the combat sands. 
The seats were not rickety 
wood-and-iron, like those in the 
rear, but thrones of leather, huge 
enough to accommodate even Tuf’s 
vast bulk without difficulty, and op- 
ulently comfortable. “Every seat is 
bound in the skin of a beast that has 
died nobly below,” Herold Nom told 
Tuf. Beneath them, a work crew of 

A BEAST FOR NORN 



men in one-piece blue coveralls was 
dragging the carcass of a gaunt feath- 
ered animal toward one of the entry- 
ways. “A fighting-bird of the House 
of Wrai Hill,” Nom explained. “The 
Wrai Beast-Master sent it up against 
a Varcour lizard-lion. Not the most 
felicitous choice.” 

Haviland Tuf said nothing. He sat 
stiff and erect, dressed in a grey vinyl 
coat that fell to his ankles, with flar- 
ing shoulder-boards and a visored 
green-and-brown cap emblazoned 
with the golden theta of the Ecolog- 
ical Engineers. His large, rough hands 
interlocked atop his bulging stomach 
while Herold Nom kept up a steady 
conversation. 

Then the Arena announcer spoke, 
the thunder of his magnified voice 
booming all around them. “Fifth 
match. From the House of Nom, a 
male ironfang, two years, weight 2.6 
quintals, trained by Junior 
Beast-Master Kers Nom. New to the 
Bronze Arena.” Immediately below, 
metal grated harshly, and a nightmare 
creature came bounding into the pit. 
The ironfang was a shaggy giant, 
sunken red eyes, a double row of 
curving teeth dripping slaver; a wolf 
grown all out of proportion, crossed 
with a saber-toothed tiger, legs as 
thick as young trees, speed and kill- 
ing grace only partially disguised by 
blue-black fur that hid muscle. The 
ironfang snarled; the arena echoed to 
the noise; scattered cheering began 
around them. 

Herold Norn smiled. “Kers is a 
cousin, one of our most promising 
juniors. He tells me this beast will do 
us proud. I like its looks, don’t you?” 

“Being new to all this, I have no 
standard of comparison,” Tuf said 
flatly. 



67 




The announcer began again. “From 
the House of Arneth-in-the- 
Gilded-Wood, a strangling-ape, six 
years, weight 3. 1 quintals, trained by 
Senior Beast-Master Danel Leigh 
Ameth. Three times a veteran of the 
Bronze Arena, three times surviv- 
ing.” 

Across the combat pit, another en- 
tryway-wrought in gold and crim- 
son-slid open, and a second beast 
lumbered out on two squat legs and 
looked around. The strangling-ape 
was short but immensely broad, with 
a triangular torso and a bullet-shaped 
head, eyes sunk deeply under a heavy 
ridge of bone. Its arms, double-jointed 
and muscular, dragged in the arena 
sand. The beast was hairless but for 
patches of dark red fur under its arms, 
its skin a dirty white. And it smelled. 
Across the arena, Haviland Tuf still 
caught the musky odor. 

“It sweats,” Norn explained. 
“Danel has driven it to killing frenzy 
before sending it forth. His beast has 
the edge in experience, and the stran- 
gling-ape is a savage creature as 
well. Unlike its cousin, the mountain 
feridian, it is a natural carnivore and 
needs little training. But Kers’ iron- 
fang is younger. The match should 
be of interest.” He leaned forward 
while Tuf sat calm, still. 

The ape turned, growling, and al- 
ready the ironfang was streaking to- 
ward it, a blue-black blur that scat- 
tered sand as it ran. The strangling-ape 
waited, spreading huge gangling arms, 
and Tuf had a blurred impression of 
the great Norn killer leaving the 
ground in one tremendous bound. 
Then the two animals were locked 
together, rolling over and over in a 
tangle of ferocity, and the arena be- 
came a symphony of screams. “The 

68 



throat,” Nom was shouting. “Tear 
out its throat!” 

Then, as suddenly as they had met, 
the two beasts parted. The ironfang 
spun away and began to move in slow 
circles, and Tuf saw that one foreleg 
was bent and broken, so that it limped 
on the three remaining. Yet still it 
circled. The strangling-ape gave it 
no opening, but turned constantly to 
face it. Long gashes drooled blood 
on the ape’s wide chest, where the 
ironfang’s sabers had slashed, but the 
beast of Ameth seemed little weak- 
ened. Herold Nom had begun to mut- 
ter softly. 

Impatient, the watchers began a 
rhythmic chant, a low wordless noise 
that swelled as new voices heard and 
joined. Tuf saw at once that the sound 
affected the animals below. Now they 
began to snarl and hiss, battle cries 
in savage voices, and the stran- 
gling-ape moved from one leg to the 
other in a macabre dance, while 
slaver ran in rivers from the gaping 
jaws of the ironfang. The chant grew 
and grew-Herold Nom joined in, thin 
body' swaying slightly as he 
moaned-and Tuf recognized the kill- 
ing-chant for what it was. The beasts 
below went into a frenzy. Suddenly 
the ironfang was charging again, and 
the ape’s long arms reached to meet 
it. The impact of the threw the stran- 
gler backward, but Tuf saw that the 
ironfang’s teeth had closed on air 
while the ape had wrapped its hands 
around the other’s throat. The iron- 
fang thrashed wildly, as they rolled 
in the sand. Then came a sharp, hor- 
ribly loud snap, and the wolf-creature 
was a rag of fur, head lolling gro- 
tesquely to one side. 

The watchers ceased their moaning 
chant and began to applaud and whis- 

GALAXY 




tie. Afterward, the gold and crimson 
door slid open again and the stran- 
gling-ape returned to where it had 
come. Four men in Norn black and 
grey came out to carry off the corpse. 

Herold Nom was sullen. “Another 
loss. I will speak to Kers. His beast 
did not find the throat.” 

Haviland Tuf stood up. “I have 
seen your Bronze Arena.” 

“Going?” Nom asked, anxious. 
“Not so soon! There are five more 
matches. In the next, a giant feridian 
fights a water-scorpion from Aman 
Island!” 

“I need see no more. It is feeding 
time for Dax, so I must return to the 
Ark.” 

Nom scrambled to his feet, and put 
an anxious hand to Tuf s shoulder to 
restrain him. “Will you sell us a 
monster, then?” 

Tuf shook off the Beast-Master’s 
grip. “Sir. I do not like to be touched. 
Restrain yourself.” When Norn’s 
hand had fallen, Tuf looked down 
into his eyes. “1 must consult my 
records, my computers. The Ark is 
in orbit. Shuttle up the day after next. 
A problem exists, I shall address 
myself to its correction.” Then, 
without further words, Haviland Tuf 
turned and walked from the Bronze 
Arena, back to the spaceport of the 
City of All Houses, where his shut- 
tlecraft sat waiting. 

3. 

Herold Nom had obviously not 
been prepared for the Ark. After his 
shuttle had docked and Tuf had 
cycled him through, the Beast-Master 
made no effort to disguise his reac- 
tion. “I should have known,” he 
kept repeating. “The size of this 

A BEAST FOR NORN 



ship, the size. 1 should have known.” 

Haviland Tuf stood unmoved, cra- 
dling Dax in one arm and stroking 
the cat slowly. “Old Earth built 
larger ships than modem worlds,” he 
said impassively. “The Ark, as a 
seedship, had to be large. It once had 
two hundred crewmen. Now it has 
one.” 

“You are the only crewman?” 
Nom said. 

Dax suddenly warned Tuf to be 
alert. The Beast-Master had begun 
to think hosti le thoughts . “ Yes , ” Tu f 
said. “The only crewman. But there 
is Dax, of course. And defenses pro- 
grammed in, lest control be wrested 
from me.” 

Norn’s plans withered, according 
to Dax. “I see,” he said. Then, ea- 
gerly, “Well, what have you come 
up with?” 

“Come,” Tuf said. 

He led Nom out down a small cor- 
ridor that led to one larger. They 
boarded a three-wheeled vehicle and 
drove through a long tunnel lined by 
glass vats of all sizes and shapes, 
filled with bubbling liquid. One bank 
of vats was divided into units small 
as a man’s fingernail; at the other 
extreme, there was a single unit large 
enough to contain the interior of the 
Bronze Arena. It was empty, but in 
some of the medium-sized tanks, 
dark shapes hung in translucent bags, 
stirring fitfully. Tuf, with Dax curled 
in his lap, stared straight ahead as he 
drove, while Nom looked wonder- 
ingly from side to side. 

They departed the tunnel at last, 
and entered a small room that was all 
computer console. Four large chairs 
sat in the four comers of the chamber, 
with control panels on their arms; a 
circular plate of blue metal was built 



69 




into the floor amidst them. Haviland 
Tuf dropped Dax into one of the 
chairs before seating himself in a sec- 
ond. Norn looked around, then took 
a chair opposite Tuf. 

“I must inform you of several 
things,” Tuf began. 

”Yes, yes,” said Norn. 
“Monsters are expensive,” Tuf 
said. “I will require one hundred 
thousand standards.” 

"What! That’s an outrage! We 
would need a hundred victories in the 
Bronze Arena to amass that sum. I 
told you, Norn is a poor- House.” 
“So. Perhaps then a richer House 



“Fifty thousand,” Nom said. “We 
can barely meet that price.” 
Haviland Tuf said nothing. 
“Eighty thousand, then! 1 can go 
no higher. The House of Norn will 
bankrupt! They will tear down our 
bronze ironfangs, and seal the Nom 
Gate!” 

Haviland Tuf said nothing, 

“Curse you! A hundred thousand, 
yes, yes. But only if your monster 
meets our requirements.” 

“The full sum on delivery.” 
“Impossible!” 

Tuf was silent again. 

“Oh, very well.” 




would meet the required price. The 
Ecological Engineering Corps has 
been defunct for centuries, sir. No 
ship of theirs remains in working or- 
der, save the Ark alone. The science 
is largely forgotten. Techniques of 
cloning and genetic engineering such 
as they practiced exist now only on 
Prometheus and Old Earth itself, 
where such secrets are closely 
guarded.” Tuf looked across to where 
Dax sat before the gently winking 
lights of the computer consoles. “And 
yet, Dax, Herold Nom feels my price 
excessive.” 



“As to the monster itself, I have 
studied your requirements closely, 
and have consulted my computers. 
On the Ark, in frozen cell-banks, 
thousands upon thousands of preda- 
tors exist, many now extinct on their 
original homeworlds. Yet few would 
satisfy the demands of the Bronze 
Arena. And of those that might, 
many are unsuitable. For example, 
I limited the selection to beasts that 
might with luck be bred on the lands 
of the House of Nom. A creature who 
could not replicate himself would be 
a poor investment. No matter how 



70 



GALAXY 



invincible, in time the animal would 
age and die, and Nom victories be 
at an end.” 

“An excellent point,” Herold Nom 
said. “We have attempted to raise 
lizard-lions and feridians and other 
beasts of the Twelve Houses, with ill 
success. The climate, the vegeta- 
tion . .” He made a gesture. • 

"Precisely. Therefore, 1 have 
eliminated silicon-based lifeforms, 
which would die on your carbon-based 
world. Also, animals of planets whose 
atmosphere varies too greatly. Also, 
beasts of dissimilar climes. You com- 
prehend the various and sundry dif- 
ficulties incumbent in my search.” 

“Yes, but get to the point. What 
have you found? What is the hundred- 
thousand-standard monster?” 

"1 offer you a selection,” Tuf said. 
"From among some thirty animals. 
Attend!” 

He touched a glowing button on 
the arm of his chair, and suddenly a 
beast was squatting on the blue-metal 
plate between them. Two meters tall 
with rubbery pink-grey skin and thin 
white hair, the creature had a low 
forehead and a swinish snout, plus 
a set of nasty curving horns and dag- 
ger-like claws. 

“1 will not trouble you with spe- 
cies names, since I observe that in- 
formality was the rule of the Bronze 
Arena,” Haviland Tuf said. "This 
is the so-called stalking-swine of 
Heydey. Chiefly a carrion-eater, but 
it has been known to relish fresh 
meat, and fights viciously when at- 
tacked. Said to be quite intelligent, 
yet impossible to domesticate. The 
stalking-swine is an excellent breeder. 
The colonists from Gulliver eventu- 
ally abandoned the Heydey settle- 
ment because of this animal some two 



hundred years past.” 

Herold Nom scratched his scalp 
between dark hair and brass coronet. 
“It’s too thin, too light. Look at the 
neck! Think what a feridian would 
do to it.” He shook his head vio- 
lently. “Besides, it is ugly. And 1 
resent the offer of a scavenger, no 
matter how ill-tempered. The House 
of Norn breeds proud fighters, beasts 
who kill their own game!” 

“So,” said Tuf. He touched the 
button, and the stalking-swine van- 
ished. In its place, bulking large 
enough to touch the plates above and 
fade into them, was a massive ball 
of armored grey flesh featureless as 
battle plate. 

“This creature’s homeworld has 
never been named, nor settled. A 
team from Old Poseidon once ex- 
plored it, and cell samples were 
taken. Zoo specimens existed briefly, 
but did not thrive. The beast was 
nicknamed the rolleram. Adults weigh 
approximately six metric tons. On the 
plains of their homeworld, the rol- 
lerams achieve speed in excess of 
fifty kilometers per standard hour, 
crushing prey beneath them. The 
beast is all mouth. Thusly, as any 
portion of its skin can be made to 
exude digestive enzymes, it simply 
rests atop its meal until the meat has 
been absorbed.” 

Herold Norn, himself half-im- 
mersed in the looming holograph, 
sounded impressed. “Ah, yes. Bet- 
ter, much better. An awesome crea- 
ture. Perhaps . .” His tone changed 
suddenly. “No, no, this will never 
do. A creature weighing six tons and 
rolling that fast might smash its way 
out of the Bronze Arena, and kill 
hundreds of patrons. Besides, who 
would pay hard coin to watch this 



A BEAST FOR NORN 



71 




thing crush a lizard-lion or a stran- 
gler? No. No sport. Your rolleram is 
too monstrous, Tuf.” 

Tuf, unmoved, hit the button once 
again. The vast grey bulk gave way 
to a sleek, snarling cat, fully as large 
as an ironfang, with slitted yellow 
eyes and powerful muscles bunched 
beneath dark blue fur. The fur was 
striped, long thin lines of bright silver 
running lengthwise down the crea- 
ture’s flanks. 

“Ahhhhhhhh,” Norn said. “A 
beauty, in truth.” 

‘‘The cobalt panther of Celia’s 
World,” Tuf said, “often called the 
cobalcat. Largest and deadliest of the 
great cats, or their analogues. The 
beast is a superlative hunter, a mir- 
acle of biologic engineering. It can 
see into the infrared for night prowl- 
ing, and the ears-note the size and 
the spread-are extremely sensitive. 
Being felinoid, the cobalcat has psionic 
ability, but this ability is far more 
developed than the usual. Fear, hun- 
ger, and bloodlust all act as triggers; 
then the cobalcat becomes a mind- 
reader. ’ ’ 

Nom looked up, startled. “What?” 

“Psionics, sir. Psionics. The cob- 
alcat is very deadly, simply because 
it knows what moves an antagonist 
will make before those moves are 
made. Do you comprehend?” 

“Yes.” Norn’s voice was excited. 
Haviland Tuf looked at Dax, and the 
big tomcat-who’d been not the least 
disturbed by the parade of scentless 
phantoms flashing on and 
off-confirmed the thin man’s enthu- 
siasm as genuine. “Perfect, perfect! 
I’d venture to say that we can even 
train these beasts as we’d train iron- 
fangs, eh? Eh? And mindreaders! 
Perfect. Even the colors are right, 

72 



dark blue, you know, and our iron- 
fangs were blue-black, so the cats 
will be most Nomic, yes. yes!” 

Tuf touched his chair arm, and the 
cobalcat vanished. “So then, no need 
to proceed further. Delivery will be 
in three weeks, if that pleases you. 

I will provide three pair, two of youn- 
glings who should be released as 
breeding stock, and one mated set 
full-grown, who might be immedi- 
ately sent into the Bronze Arena.” 
“So soon,” Nom began. “Fine, 
but . .” 

“I use the stasis field. Reversed, 
it produces chronic distortion, time 
acceleration if you will. Standard 
procedure. Promethean techniques 
would require that you wait until the 
clones aged to maturity naturally, 
which is sometimes inconvenient. It 
would perhaps be prudent to add that, 
although I provide Nom with six an- 
imals, only three actual individuals 
are represented. The Ark carries a tri- 
ple cobalcat cell. I will clone each 
specimen twice, male and female, 
and hope for a viable genetic mix 
when they crossbreed on Lyronica.” 
Dax filled Tuf’s head with a flood 
of triumph, confusion and impa- 
tience; Herold Nom, then, had under- 
stood nothing of what Tuf had said, 
or at any rate that was one interpre- 
tation. “Fine,” Nom said. “1 will 
send ships for the animals promptly, 
with proper cages. Then we will pay 
you.” 

Dax radiated deceit, distrust, alarm. 
“Sir. You will pay the full fee be- 
fore any beasts are handed over. ’ ’ 
“But you said on delivery,” 
“Admitted. Yet I am given to im- 
pulsive whims, and impulse now tells 
me to collect first, rather than si- 
multaneously.” 



GALAXY 




“Oh, very well.” Norn said. 
“Though your demands are arbitrary 
and excessive. With these cobalcats, 
we shall soon recoup our fee.” He 
started to rise. 

HavilandTuf raised a finger. “One 
moment. You have not seen fit to 
inform me of the ecology of Lyron- 
ica, nor the particular realms of Norn 
House. Perhaps prey exists. I must 
caution you, however, that your cob- 
alcats will not breed unless hunting 
is good. They need suitable game 
species.” 

“Yes, yes, of course.” 

“Let me add this. For an additional 
five thousand standards, I might 
clone you a breeding stock of Celian 
hoppers, furred herbivores renowned 
for their succulent flesh.” 

Herold Norn frowned. “You ought 
to give them to us without charge. 
You have extorted enough money, 
and . .” 

Tuf rose, and gave a ponderous 
shrug. “The man berates me, Dax,” 
he said to his cat. “What am 1 to do? 
I seek only an honest living.” He 
looked at Nom. “Another of my im- 
pulses comes to me. I feel that you 
will not relent, even were 1 to offer 
an excellent discount. Therefore I 
yield. The hoppers are yours without 
charge.” 

“Good. Excellent.” Norn turned 
toward the door. “We shall take them 
at the same time as the cobalcats, and 
release them about the estates.” 

Haviland Tuf and Dax followed 
him from the chamber, and they rode 
in silence back to Norn's ship. 

4 

The fee was sent up by the House 
of Nom the day before delivery was 



due. The following afternoon, men 
in black and gray ascended to the Ark, 
and carried six tranquilized cobalcats 
to the waiting cages in their ships. 
Tuf bid them a passive farewell, and 
heard no more from Herold Nom. But 
he kept the Ark in orbit about Lyron- 
ica. 

Less than three of Lyronica’s short 
days passed before Tuf observed his 
clients had slated a cobalcat for a bout 
in the Bronze Arena. On the ap- 
pointed evening, he disguised him- 
self as best a man such as he could 
disguise himself-with false beard, 
shoulder-length wig of red hair, gaudy 
puff-sleeved suit of canary yellow 
and furred turban-and shuttled down 
with hope of escaping attention. When 
the match was called (third on the 
schedule), Tuf was sitting in the back 
of the Arena, a rough stone wall 
against his shoulders, a narrow 
wooden seat attempting to support his 
weight. 

“Third match,” the announcer 
cried, even as workers pulled off the 
scattered meaty chunks of the loser 
in the second. “From the House of 
Varcour, a female lizard-lion, nine 
months, weight 1.4 quintals, trained 
by Junior Beast-Master Ammari y 
Varcour Otheni. Once a veteran of 
the Bronze Arena, once surviving.” 
Customers close to Tuf began to 
cheer and wave their hands wildly-he 
had chosen to enter by the Varcour 
Gate this time, walking down green 
concrete, through the maw of a mon- 
strous golden lizard. Far away and 
below, a green-gold enameled door 
slid up. Tuf lifted binoculars to his 
eyes; the lizard-lion scrabbled for- 
ward-two meters of scaled green rep- 
tile with a whip-like tail thrice its own 
length and the long snout of an Old 



A BEAST FOR NORN 



73 




Earth alligator. Its jaws opened and 
closed soundlessly, displaying im- 
pressive teeth. 

“The House of Norn, imported 
from offworld for your amusement, 
a female cobalcat. Aged-aged three 
weeks.’’ The announcer paused. 
“Aged three years," he said at last, 
“weight 2.3 quintals, trained by Sen- 
ior Beast-Master Herold Norn. New 
to the Bronze Arena.” The metallic 
dome overhead rang to the caco- 
phonous cheering of the Norn sector; 
Herold Norn had packed the Bronze 
Arena with his housemen and tourists 
betting the gray and black standard. 

The cobalcat came from the dark- 
ness with cautious fluid grace, and 
its great golden eyes swept the arena. 
It was every bit what Tuf had prom- 
ised; a bundle of deadly muscle and 
frozen motion, blue with but a single 
silvery streak. Its growl could scarcely 
be heard, so far was Tuf from the 
action, hut he saw its mouth gape 
through his glasses. 

The lizard-lion saw it too, and 
came waddling forward, short scaled 
legs kicking in the sand, long im- 
possible tail arched above it like the 
sting of some reptilian scorpion. 
Then, when the cobalcat turned its 
liquid eyes on the enemy, the lizard- 
lion brought the tail forward and 
down with a bone-breaking crack. 
But the cobalcat had smoothly slipped 
to one side and nothing shattered but 
air and sand. 

The cat circled, yawning. The liz- 
ard-lion, implacable, turned and raised 
its tail again, opened its jaws, lunged 
forward. The cobalcat avoided both 
teeth and whip. Again the tail cracked; 
and again the cat was too quick. 
Someone in the audience began to 
moan the killing chant, others picked 
74 



it up; Tuf turned his binoculars, and 
saw swaying in the Nom seats. The 
lizard-lion gnashed its long jaws in 
frenzy, smashed its whip across the 
nearest entry door, and began to 
thrash. 

The cobalcat, sensing an opening, 
moved behind its enemy with a grace- 
ful leap, pinned the struggling lizard 
with one great blue paw, and clawed 
the soft greenish flanks and belly to 
ribbons. After a time and a few futile 
snaps of its whip that only distracted 
the cat, the lizard-lion lay still. 

The Norns were cheering very 
loudly. Haviland Tuf-huge, full- 
bearded and gaudily dressed-rose 
and left. 

5 

Weeks passed; the Ark remained 
in orbit around Lyronica. Haviland 
Tuf listened to results from the Bronze 
Arena on his ship's comm, and noted 
that the cobalcats were winning match 
after match. Herold Norn still lost a 
contest on occasion-when he used an 
ironfang to Till up his Arena obliga- 
tions-but defeats were easily out- 
weighed by victories. 

Tuf sat with Dax curled in his lap, 
drank tankards of brown ale from the 
Ark brewery, and wailed. 

About a month later, a ship rose 
to meet him; slim, needle-pro wed, 
green and gold. It docked, after 
comm contact, and Tuf met the vis- 
itors with Dax in his aims. The cat 
read them as friendly, so he activated 
no defenses. 

There were four, all dressed in ar- 
mor of scaled gold metal and green 
enamel. Three stood at attention. The 
fourth, florid and corpulent with a 
golden helmet and a bright green 

GALAXY 




plume to conceal his baldness, stepped 
forward and offered a meaty hand. 

“Your intent is appreciated,’’ Tuf 
told him, keeping both hands firmly 
on Dax, “but I do not care to touch. 
I do require your name and business, 
sir.” 

“Morho y Varcour Otheni,” the 
leader began. 

Tuf raised one palm. “So. And 
you are Senior Beast-Master of the 
House of Varcour, come to buy a 
monster. Enough. 1 knew it all the 
while, 1 must confess. 1 merely wished 
to determine if you would tell the 
truth.” 

The fat Beast-Master’s mouth 
puckered. 

“Your housemen should remain 
here,” Tuf said, turning. “Follow 
me.” 

Haviland Tuf let Morho y Varcour 
Otheni utter scarcely a word until 
they were alone in the computer 
room, sitting diagonally opposite. 
“You heard of me from the Moms,” 
Tuf said then. “Is that not correct?” 

Morho smiled toothily. “Indeed 
we did. A Nom houseman was per- 
suaded to reveal the source of their 
cobalcats. To our delight, your Ark 
was still in orbit. You seem to have 
found Lyronica diverting?” 

“Problems exist. 1 hope to help. 
Your problem, for example. Varcour 
is now the last and least of the Twelve 
Great Houses. Your lizard-lions fail 
to awe me, and your realms are 
chiefly swampland. Choice of com- 
batants become therefore limited. 
Have I divined the essence of your 
complaint?” 

“Hmpf. Yes, indeed. You antici- 
pate me, sir. But you do it well. We 
were holding our own well enough 
until you interfered; we have not 

A BEAST FOR NORN 



taken a match from Nom since, and 
they were previously ourchiefest vic- 
tims. A few paltry wins over Wrai 
Hill and Amar Island, a lucky score 
against Feridian, a pair of death- 
draws with Ameth and Sin Doon-that 
has been our lot this past month. Pfui . 
We cannot survive. They will make 
me a Brood-Tender and ship me back 
to the estates unless I act.” 

Tuf quieted Morho with an upraised 
hand. “No need to speak further. 
Your distress is noted. In the time 
since 1 have helped Herold Nom, I 
have been fortunate enough to be 
gifted with a great deal of leisure. 
Accordingly, as an exercise of the 
mind, I have been able to devote 
myself to the problems of the Great 
Houses, each in its turn. We need not 
waste time. I can solve your present 
difficulties. There will be cost, how- 
ever. ’ ’ 

Morho grinned. “I am prepared. 
I heard about your prices. High, there 
is no arguing, but we are prepared to 
pay, if you can 

“Sir,” Tuf said, “I am a man of 
charity. Nom was a poor house, Her- 
old almost a beggar. In mercy, I gave 
him a low price. The domains of 
Varcour are richer, its standards 
brighter, its victories more wildly 
sung. For you, 1 must charge three 
hundred thousand standards, to make 
up for the losses I suffered dealing 
with Nom.” 

Morho made a shocked sound, and 
his scales gave metallic blinks as he 
shifted in his seat. “Too much, too 
much,” he protested. “1 implore 
you. Truly, we are more glorious 
than Nom, but not so great as you 
suppose. To pay this price of yours, 
we must need starve. Lizard-lions 
would run over our battlements. Our 



75 




towns would sink on their stilts, until 
the swamp mud covered them over 
and the children drowned.” 

Tuf was looking at Dax. “Quite 
so,” he said, when his glance went 
back to Morho. “You touch me 
deeply. Two hundred thousand stand- 
ards.” 

Morho began to protest and im- 
plore again, but this time Tuf merely 
sat silently, arms on their armrests, 
until the Beast-Master, red-faced, 
sweating, finally ran down and agreed. 

Tuf punched his control arm. The 
image of a great lizard materialized; 
it stood three meters tall, covered in 
grey-green plate scales and standing 
on two thick clawed legs. Its head, 
atop a short neck, was large enough, 
the jaws great enough, to take off a 
man’s head and shoulders in a single 
chomp. But the creature’s most re- 
markable features were its forelegs; 
short thick ropes of muscle orna- 
mented by meter-long spurs of dis- 
colored bone. 

“The trig neryei of Cable’s Land- 
ing,” Tuf said, “or so it was named 
by the Fyndii, whose colonists pre- 
ceded men on that world by a mil- 
lenium. The term translates, literally, 
as ‘living knife.’ Also called the 
bladed tyrant, referring to the beast’s 
resemblance to the tyrannosaur, a 
long-extinct reptile of Old Earth. A 
superficial resemblance. The tris ner- 
yei is a far more efficient carnivore 
than the tyrannosaur ever was, due 
to its terrible forelegs, swords of bone 
that it uses with a frightful instinctive 
ferocity.” 

Morho was leaning forward and 
Dax filled Tuf’s head with hot en- 
thusiasm. “Excellent!” the Beast- 
Master said, “though the names are 
a bit long-winded. We shall call them 

76 



tyrannoswords, eh?” 

“Call them what you will, it mat- 
ters not to me. The animals have 
many obvious advantages for the 
House of Varcour,” Tuf said. “Should 
you take them, I will throw in-without 
any additional charge-a breeding stock 
of Cathadayn tree-slugs. You will 
find that . .” 

6 

Tuf followed the news from the 
Bronze Arena, although he never 
again ventured to the soil of Lyron- 
ica. The cobalcats continued to sweep 
all before them; in the latest featured 
encounter, one of the Nom beasts had 
destroyed a prime Ameth strangling- 
ape and an Amar Island fleshfrog 
during a special triple match. 

But Varcour fortunes were also on 
the upswing; the newly-introduced 
tyrannoswords had proved a Bronze 
Arena sensation, with their booming 
cries and their heavy tread, and the 
relentless death of their bone-swords. 
In three matches so far, a huge feri- 
dian, a water-scorpion, and a Gnethin 
spidercat had all proved unequal to 
the Varcour lizards. Morho y Varcour 
Otheni was reported ecstatic. Next 
week, tyrannosword would face cob- 
alcat in a struggle for supremacy, and 
a packed arena was being predicted. 

Herold Nom called up once, shortly 
after the tyrannoswords had scored 
their first victory. “Tuf!” he said 
sternly, “you were not to sell to the 
other Houses.” 

Haviland Tuf sat calmly, petting 
Dax. “No such matter was ever dis- 
cussed. Your own monsters perform 
as expected. Do you complain be- 
cause another now shares your good 
fortune?” 



GALAXY 




“Yes. No. That is-well, never 
mind. I suppose I can’t stop you. If 
the other Houses get animals that beat 
our cats, however, you will provide 
us with something that can beat what- 
ever you sell them. Understand?” 
“Of course.” He looked down at 
Dax. “Herold Norn now questions 
my comprehension.” Then up again. 
“I will always sell, if you have the 
price.” 

Norn scowled on the comm screen. 
“Yes, yes. Well, by then our victo- 
ries should have mounted high enough 
to afford whatever outlandish price 
you intend to charge.” 

“I trust that all goes well other- 
wise?” Tuf said. 

“Well, yes and no. In the Arena, 
yes, yes, definitely. But otherwise, 
well, that was what I called about. 
The four young cats don’t seem in- 
terested in breeding, for some reason. 
And our Brood-Tender keeps com- 
plaining that they are getting thin. He 
doesn’t think they’re healthy. Now, 
I can’t say personally, as I’m here in 
the City and the animals are back on 
the plains around Nom House. But 
some worry does exist. The cats run 
free, of course, but we have tracers 
on them, so we can ...” 

Tuf raised a hand. “It is no doubt 
not mating season for the cobalcats. ” 
“That makes sense. Just a question 
of time then, I suppose. The other 
question I wanted to go over con- 
cerned these hoppers of yours. We 
set them loose, you know, and they 
have demonstrated no difficulty 
whatever in breeding. The ancestral 
Nom grasslands have been chewed 
bare. It is very annoying. They hop 
about everywhere. What are we to 
do?” 

“Breed the cobalcats,” Tuf sug- 

A BEAST FOR NORN 



gested. “They are excellent preda- 
tors, and will check the hopper 
plague.” 

Herold Nom looked puzzled, and 
mildly distressed. “Yes, yes,” he 
said. 

He started to say something else, 
but Tuf rose. “I fear I must end our 
conversation,” he said. “A shuttle- 
ship has entered into docking orbit 
with the Ark. Perhaps you would re- 
cognize it. It is blue-steel, with large 
triangular grey wings.” 

“The House of Wrai Hill!” Nom 
said. 

“Fascinating,” said Tuf. “Good 
day.” 

7 

Beast-Master Denis Lon Wrai paid 
three hundred thousand standards for 
his monster, an immensely powerful 
red-furred ursoid from the hills of 
Vagabond. Haviland Tuf sealed the 
transaction with a brace of scamper- 
sloth eggs. 

The week following, four men in 
orange silk and flame-red capes vis- 
ited the Ark. They returned to the 
House of Feridian four hundred fifty 
thousand standards poorer, with a 
contract for the delivery of six great 
armored poison-elk, plus a gift herd 
of Hrangan grass pigs. 

The Beast-Master of Sin Doon re- 
ceived a giant serpent; the emissary 
from Amar Island was pleased by his 
godzilla. Dant seniors in milk-white 
robes and silver buckles delighted in 
the slavering garghoul that Haviland 
Tuf offered them, with a trifling gift. 
And so, one by one, each of the 
Twelve Great Houses of Lyronica 
sought him out, received its monster, 
paid the ever-increasing price. 



77 




By that time, both of Norn’s fight- 
ing cobalcats were dead; the first 
sliced easily in two by the bone-sword 
of a Varcour tyrannosword, the sec- 
ond crushed between the massive 
clawed paws of a Wrai Hill ursoid 
(though the ursoid too had died)— if 
the great cats had espied their fate, 
they had proved unable to avoid it. 
Herold Norn had been calling daily, 
but Tuf had instructed his computer 
to refuse the calls. 

Finally, with eleven Houses as past 
customers, Haviland Tuf sat across 
the computer room from Danel Leigh 
Ameth, Senior Beast-Master of Ar- 
neth-in-the-Gilded-Wood, once 
greatest and proudest of the Twelve 
Great Houses of Lyronica, now last 
and least. Ameth was immensely tall, 
standing even with Tuf himself, but 
had none of Tuf s fat; his skin was 
hard ebony, all muscle, face a 
hawk-nosed axe, hair short and iron 
grey. The Beast-Master came to the 
conference in cloth-of-gold, crimson 
belt and boots, a tiny crimson beret 
aslant upon his head. He carried a 
trainer’s pain-prod like a walking 
stick. 

Dax read immense hostility in the 
man, treachery, and barely sup- 
pressed rage. Accordingly, Haviland 
Tuf carried a small laser strapped to 
his stomach just beneath his great- 
coat. 

“The strength of Arneth-in 
-the-Gilded-Wood has always been 
in variety,” Danel Leigh Ameth said. 
“When the other Houses of Lyronica 
threw all their fortunes on the backs 
of a single beast, our fathers and 
grandfathers worked with dozens. 
Against any animal of theirs, we had 
an optimal choice, a strategy. That 
has been our greatness and our pride. 

78 



But we can have no strategy against 
these demon-beasts of yours, trader. 
No matter which of our hundred 
fighters we send onto the sand, it 
comes back dead. We are forced to 
deal with you.” 

“Not so,” said Haviland Tuf. “I 
force no one. Still, look at my stock. 
Perhaps fortune will see fit to give 
you back your strategic options.” He 
touched the buttons on his chair, and 
a parade of monsters came and went 
before the eyes of the Arneth 
Beast-Master; creatures furred and 
scaled and feathered and covered by 
armor plate, beasts of hill and forest 
and lake and plain, predators and 
scavengers and deadly herbivores of 
sizes great and small. And Danel 
Leigh Ameth, his lips pressed tightly 
together, finally ordered four each of 
the dozen largest and deadliest spe- 
cies, at a cost of some two million 
standards. 

The conclusion of the transac- 
tion-complete, as with all the other 
Houses, with a gift of some small 
harmless animal-did nothing to soothe 
Ameth’s foul temper. “Tuf,” he said 
when the dealing was over, “you are 
a clever and devious man, but you 
do not fool me.” 

Haviland Tuf said nothing. 

“You have made yourself im- 
mensely wealthy, and you have 
cheated all who bought from you and 
thought to profit. The Noms, for ex- 
ample-their cobalcats are worthless. 

“They were a poor House; your 
price brought them to the edge of 
bankruptcy, just as you have done to 
all of us. They thought to recoup 
through victories. Bah! There will be 
no Nom victories now! Each House 
that you have sold to gained the edge 
on those who purchased previously. 

GALAXY 




Thus Ameth, the last to purchase, 
remains the greatest House of all. Our 
monsters will wreak devastation. The 
sands of the Bronze Arena will darken 
with the blood of the lesser beasts.” 

Tufs hands locked on the bulge 
of his stomach. His face was placid. 

‘‘You have changed nothing! The 
Great Houses remain, Arneth the 
greatest and Nom the least. All you 
have done is bleed us, like the prof- 
iteer you are, until every lord must 
struggle and scrape to get by. The 
Houses now wait for victory, pray for 
victory, depend on victory, but all the 
victories will be Ameth’s. We alone 
have not been cheated, because 1 
thought to buy last and thus best.” 

‘‘So,” said Haviland Tuf. ‘‘You 
are then a wise and sagacious 
Beast-Master, if this indeed is the 
case. Yet I deny that I have cheated 
anyone.” 

“Don't play with words!” Ameth 
roared. “Henceforth you will deal no 
longer with the Great Houses. Norn 
has no money to buy from you again, 
but if they did, you would not sell to 
them. Do you understand? We will 
not go round and round forever.” 

“Of course,” Tuf said. He looked 
at Dax. “Now Danel Leigh Arneth 
imputes my understanding. I am al- 
ways misunderstood. ” His calm gaze 
returned to the angry Beast-Master. 
“Your point, sir, is well-taken. Per- 
haps it is time for me to leave Ly- 
ronica. In any event, 1 shall not deal 
with Norn again, nor with any of the 
Great Houses. This is a foolish im- 
pulse-by thus acting 1 foreswear great 
profits-but 1 am a gentle man much 
given to following my whim. Obe- 
dient to the esteemed Danel Leigh 
Ameth, 1 bow to your demand.” 

Dax reported wordlessly that Ar- 



neth was pleased and pacified; he had 
cowed Tuf, and won the day for his 
House. His rivals would get no new 
champions. Once again, the Bronze 
Arena would be predictable. He left 
satisfied. 

Three weeks later, a fleet of twelve 
glittering gold-flecked shuttles ar- 
rived to remove the purchases of Da- 
nel Leigh Arneth. Haviland Tuf, 
stroking a limp lazy Dax, saw them 
off, then returned down the long cor- 
ridors of the Ark to his control room, 
to take a call from Herold Nom. 

The thin Beast-Master looked pos- 
itively skeletal. “Tuf!” he ex- 
claimed. “Everything is going wrong. 
You must help.” 

“Wrong? 1 solved your problem.” 

Nom pressed his features together 
in a grimace, and scratched beneath 
his brass coronet. “No, no. listen. 
The cobalcats are all dead, or sick. 
Four of them dead in the Bronze 
Arena-we knew the second pair were 
too young, but when the first couple 
lost, there was nothing else to do. It 
was that or go back to ironfangs. Now 
we have only two left. They don't eat 
much-catch a few hoppers, but noth- 




A BEAST FOR NORN 



79 



ing else. And we can’l train them, 
either. A trainer comes into the pen 
with a pain-prod, and the damn cats 
know what he intends. They're al- 
ways a move head, you understand? 
In the arena, they won't respond to 
the killing chant at all. It’s terrible. 
The worst thing is they don't even 
breed. We need more of them. What 
are we supposed to enter in the gam- 
ing pits?" 

"It is not cobalcat breeding sea- 
son,” Tuf said. 

"When is their breeding season?” 

“A fascinating question. Pity you 
did not ask sooner. As I understand, 
the female cobalt panther goes into 
heat each spring, when the snowtufts 
blossom on Celia’s World. Some 
type of biological trigger is in- 
volved.” 

“You planned this. Lyronica has 
no snowthings whatever. Now I sup- 
pose you intend charging us a fortune 
for these flowers.” 

“Sir. Of course not. Were the op- 
tion mine, I would gladly give them 
to you. Your plight wounds me. I am 
concerned. However, as it happens, 
I have given my word to Danel Leigh 
Ameth to deal no more with the Great 
Houses of Lyronica.” He shrugged 
hopelessly. 

“We won victories with your cats,” 
Nom said, an edge of desperation in 
his voice, “Our treasury has been 
growing-we have forty thousand 
standards now. It is yours. Sell us 
these flowers. Or better, a new ani- 
mal. Bigger. Fiercer. I saw the Dant 
garghouls. Sell us something like 
that. We have nothing to enter in the 
Bronze Arena!” 

“No? What of your ironfangs? The 
pride of Nom, I was told.” 

Herold Nom waved impatiently. 



“We have been having problems. 
These hoppers eat anything, every- 
thing. They’ve gotten out of control. 
Millions, all over, eating the grass, 
and the crops. The things they’ve 
done to farmland-the cobalcats love 
them, yes, but we don’t have enough 
cobalcats. And the wild ironfangs 
won’t touch the hoppers. They don’t 
like the taste. But, you understand, 
all the other grass-eaters left, driven 
out by these hoppers of yours, and 
the ironfangs went with them. Where, 
I don’t know that either. Gone, 
though. Into the unclaimed lands, 
beyond the realms of Nom. There are 
some villages out there, a few farm- 
ers, but they hate the Great Houses. 
Tamberkin, all of them, don’t even 
have dog fights. They’ll probably try 
to tame the ironfangs, if they see 
them.” 

“So,” said Tuf. “But then you 
have your kennels, do you not?” 

“Not any more,” Nom said. He 
sounded very harried. “I ordered 
them shut. The ironfangs were losing 
every match, especially after you be- 
gan to sell to the other Houses. It 
seemed a foolish waste to maintain 
dead weight. Beisdes, the expense- we 
needed every standard. You bled us 
dry. We had Arena fees to pay, and 
of course we had to wager, and lately 
we’ve had to buy some food from 
Tamber just to feed all our housemen 
and trainers. I mean, you would 
never believe the things the hoppers 
have done to our crops.” 

“Sir,” said Tuf. “You insult me. 
I am an ecologist. I know a great deal 
of hoppers and their ways. Am I to 
understand that you shut your iron- 
fang kennels?” 

“Yes, yes. We turned the useless 
things loose, and now they're gone 



80 



GALAXY 




with the rest. What are we going to 
do? The hoppers are overrunning the 
plains, the cats won't mate, and our 
money will run out if we must con- 
tinue to import food and pay Arena 
fees without hope of victory.” 

Tuf folded his hands together. 
“You do indeed face a series of del- 
icate problems. And 1 am the very 
man to help you to their solution. 
Unfortunately, I have pledged my 
bond to Danel Leigh Ameth.” 

“Is it hopeless, then? Tuf, 1 am a 
man begging, 1 a Senior Beast-Master 
of Nom. Soon we will drop from the 
games entirely. We will have no 
funds for Arena fees or betting, no 
animals to enter. We are cursed by 
ill fortune. No Great House has ever 
failed to provide its allotment of 
fighters, not even Feridian during its 
Twelve-Year Drought. We will be 
shamed. The House of Nom will 
sully its proud history by sending 
dogs and cats onto the sand, to be 
shredded ignominiously by the huge 
monsters that you have sold the other 
Houses.” 

“Sir,” Tuf said. “If you will per- 
mit me an impertinent remark, and 
one perhaps without foundation, I 
will give you my opinion. 1 have a 
hunch-yes, that is the proper word-a 
hunch that the monsters you fear may 
be in short supply in the weeks and 
months to come. For example, the 
adolescent ursoids of Vagabond may 
very shortly go into hibernation. 
They are less than a year old, you 
understand. I hope the lords of Wrai 
Hill are not disconcerted by this, yet 
I fear they may be. Vagabond, as I’m 
sure you are aware, has an extremely 
irregular orbit about its primary, so 



that its Long Winters last approxi- 
mately twenty standard years. The 
ursoids are attuned to this cycle. Soon 
their body processes will slow to al- 
most nothing-some have mistaken a 
sleeping ursoid for a dead one, you 
know-and I don’t think they will be 
easily awakened. Perhaps, as the 
trainers of Wrai Hill are men of good 
character and keen intellect, they 
might find a way. But I would be 
strongly inclined to suspect that most 
of their energies and their funds will 
be devoted to feeding their populace, 
in the light of the voracious appetities 
of scampers loths. In quite a like man- 
ner, the men of the House of Varcour 
will be forced to deal with an explo- 
sion of Cathadayn tree-slugs. The 
tree-slugs are particularly fascinating 
creatures. At one point in their life 
cycle, they become veritable sponges, 
and double in size. A large enough 
grouping is fully capable of drying 
up even an extensive swampland.” 
Tuf paused, and his thick fingers beat 
in drumming rhythms across his 
stomach. “I ramble unconscionably. 
Sir. Do you grasp my point, though? 
My thrust?” 

Herold Nom looked like a dead 
man. “You are mad. You have de- 
stroyed us. Our economy, our ecol- 
ogy ... but why? We paid you fairly. 
The Houses, the Houses ... no 
beasts, no funds. How can the games 
go on? No one will send fighters to 
the Bronze Arena!” 

Haviland Tuf raised his hands in 
shock. “Really?” he said. 

Then he turned off the communi- 
cator and rose. Smiling a tiny 
tight-lipped smile, he began to talk 
to Dax. George R.R. Martin 



A BEAST FOR NORN 



81 




MARTIAN “RIVERS” — the dry, stream-llke channels discovered by 
the Mariner and Viking missions — may have been caused by flowing 
oil, according to Caltech geophysicist Yuk L, Yung. If Mars had a meth- 
ane atmosphere early in its history, as current theories of the evolution 
of the solar system suggest, conditions might have been suitable for 
the conversion of some of the methane to free methyl radicals. The 
radicals could then polymerize into more complex hydrocarbons which 
would be liquid at the prevailing temperatures and pressures. These 
oil — like liquids would then fall as rain, and the run — off would form the 
observed Jhannels. 

PARTICLE-BEAM WEAPONS, a real-world version of that old sf 
stand — by the death ray, may come out of a Department of Defense 
study of what is euphemistically referred to as “directed — energy tech- 
nology,” according to Aviation Week. The particle — beam weapons, 
intended primarily for use against missiles and satellites, operate on 
the same principles as the particle accelerators used in nuclear re- 
search. But instead of directing the beam into a target in the laboratory 
to study resulting nuclear reactions, the weapon would shoot the beam 
tens or hundreds of kilometers to destroy an enemy satellite or re — entry 
vehicle. The beam could consist of charged particles such as electrons 
or protons, or neutral atoms, most likely hydrogen. 

INTENSE SUNSPOT ACTIVITY can be expected within the next 
year, as the peak of the current 11 — year sunspot cycle approaches. 
While the previous peak, in 1969, was not particularly spectacular, the 
one before that, in 1958, was the strongest in the two — hundred — year 
history of sunspot observations, and current data suggest that the 
up — coming peak may equal or surpass that level. 

PARAPSYCHOLOGICAL PHENOMENA do not seem to be associ- 
ated with unusual electromagnetic activity, according to E. Balanovski 

(Continued on page 87) 






Because the mind is a higher system composed of complex subsys- 
tems, once in a while a "rare event” occurs which cannot be explained 
or duplicated easily. These “rare events” seem to occur more often 
when the subject is not in a "normal” state (whatever that is!). At the 
present, we consider such a subject to be in an “altered state of con- 
sciousness.” 

One way to achieve an ASC is to suffer from a mental or physical 
health problem. Literature on psychic and occult phenomena is full of 
instances and, so far as I am aware, these aspects have not been 
thoroughly investigated. Central-nervous-system disturbances are often 
associated with unexplained phenomena. 

In a sick person the phenomena may be spontaneous, out of control 
and undesirable. Factors show up that have been associated with 
psychic phenomena, such as low-frequency, high-amplitude brain 
waves. In a large number of cases, for example, those with Familial 
Periodic Disease (FPD-a type of periodic flaccid paralysis) show evi- 
dence of psychic ability. The following excerpts are from personal cor- 
respondence with physicians and patients: 

". .In patients there are preponderant 4-to-6-cycle-per-second 
brain waves, apparently originating in the hypothalamus. In about 
90% of the patients, questioning reveals definite evidence of ESP 
ability. In some of the remaining 10% a sort of "reverse psycho- 
kinesis’ seems active. This is the sort of thing that ‘if there are 1 0,000 
people in the stadium and one seagull flies over, guess who gets 
crapped on. N.T. (M.D.).” 

“. .1 am interested in information you may have on this disease 
as my sister and I have it. We have had no luck finding a doctor who 
knows anything about it, much less the treatment. My sister has 
always been extremely gifted (or cursed) with the phenomena of 

(Continued on page 84) 

83 




(Continued from page 83) 

astral projection, seeing auras, spontaneous trances, etc. Mine is 
limited to being very intuitive about people, thoughts, 
emotions”. .W.F. (This person is female, an attorney, and a writer 
of very meaningful ‘automatic poetry.’ She feels it is similar to switch- 
ing on a radio and just picking it up. .J.B.) 

The Dreyfus Medical Foundation, 2 Broadway, New York 10004, has 
pioneered the extensive investigations into useful applications of di- 
phenylhydantoin (DPH/Dilantin) -above and beyond its use in control 
of epileptic seizures-for conditions ranging from skin scleroderma to 
heart irregularity. A letter in one of their publications states: 

“. .1 have had thoughts that could not be dismissed from my mind, 
no matter how hard I tried. Very commonly there would be a metallic 
taste in my mouth. A tingling sensation in my extremities, but worst 
of ail was the unexplained depression and periodic paralysis. Our 
family, going back at least three generations, had suffered with re- 
curring paralysis . and confusion, with many thoughts at the same 
time (even though many were extremely bright), was all part of the 
clinical picture. Three days after Dilantin was prescribed, taking 100 
milligrams per day, I feel noticeably stronger, less anxious, more 
energetic and, best of all, the paralysis attacks seem to have been 
aborted ... our heartfelt thanks. .” 

After my visit to the Dreyfus Foundation, I sent all the information to 
W.F.; she replied: 

“Started taking 100 mg of Dilantin per day plus sugar-free diet and 
two tablespoons potassium chloride. Feel much, much better. It also 
has brought about an increase in energy, allowing me to accomplish 
twice as much as before. I don’t know how I can ever thank you 
enough, but if I can ever be of service to you or anyone else, please 
let me know.” 

Other “psychic symptoms from sick sensitives” have been investi- 
gated by (1 ) Baron von Reichenback in the 1 9th century (hypersensitive 
to magnetic fields), and The Psychical Research Foundation in Durham, 
N.C. (poltergeist phenomena from individuals with epilepsy and central 
nervous system disorders). 

Some of these symptoms, while interesting and helpful from a psychic 
standpoint, are most undesirable from a physical standpoint, and are 
scary to the person involved. The drug Dilantin seems to be the best 
control for the undesirable physical and mental effects, with the least 
drug side effects. 

-Jim Beal 



SUBSCRIBE 

TODAY! 

84 GALAXY 





The Depression 
of 
1980 



One of the houses on Santa Clara 
Drive was brightly lit for Christmas 
Eve. It was one of the larger houses, 
with an indoor greenhouse jutting out 
in a bay on one side and a pool in 
back. There were guards all around 
the house, lots of them. It was quiet 
and cold outside, and the guards 
weren’t happy at all about being 
there. They were happy to have uni- 
forms and jobs, but they didn’t have 
pistols in case an angry mob came to 
flame the place. They didn’t have 
nightsticks. They didn’t have any- 
thing except gloved hands. And there 
was a street fight going on inside the 
house. 

A big spruce tree stood in one cor- 
ner of the parlor, decorated with or- 
naments that had been in the Shockley 
family for three generations. Four big 
red-felt stockings hung from the fire- 
place across the room. In between, 
all the furniture had been removed 
and the expensive Oriental rug rolled 



up. The Shockley family, Jerome and 
Lynn and their children, Byron, Lisa, 
Jeffrey, and Kathy, sat on the car- 
peted steps of the grand staircase in 
the foyer, talking. A young man, 
bearded, scruffy, shabbily dressed, 
turned and spoke. “We’re ready,” 
he said. ‘‘We’ll do you whatever you 
want.” 

Shockley nodded. ‘‘All right, 
kids,” he said, ‘‘upstairs to bed.” 

“Aw,” said Lisa. 

“Go upstairs. Santa’s coming.” 
After the children had reluctantly 
gone to their rooms, Shockley looked 
at the youth in the leather jacket. 
“I don’t want anyone really getting 
hurt, you understand. My insurance 
company would kill me,” One of the 
other boys laughed. 

Lynn Shockley had objected to let- 
ting the gang into her house. “Then 
why not let the children watch?” she 
had said angrily. “It’s just like tel- 
evision to them. What is this, a new 



85 




kind of caroling?” 

“That’s exactly what it is,” said 
Shockley. “These boys aren’t going 
to stand around and sing ‘Silent 
Night.’ And nobody else who comes 
here tonight is going to be nice 
enough to knock on our door before 
he comes in.” 

So the Shockleys had an evening’s 
entertainment on Christmas Eve. There 
were twelve youths in all, divided 
evenly into two teams or gangs. One 
suffered an accidental knife wound 
in the forearm and bled on the Shock- 
ley’s clean floor. Another was kicked 
in the throat and had to be dragged 
to one side, as there was barely 
enough room as it was. A third suf- 
fered a tremendous blow from a tire 
chain across the face, and he lay mo- 
tionless near the tree. After half an 
hour, Jerome Shockley stood and 
walked toward the battling youths. 
“Thank you, thank you, Merry 
Christmas,” he said. He had found 
the spectacle arousing, almost un- 
pleasantly so. 

The two gangs stood still, panting. 
“Merry Christmas,” said one young 
man, bruised and exhausted. 

Shockley took a twenty-dollar bill 
from his wallet and held it out to the 
boy. They looked at each other for 
a moment. 

“We don’t want that,” said the 
youth. 

“What?” said Shockley, bewil- 
dered. 

“We can’t get nothing for that. 
Nobody takes that where we come 
from. We live in a shanty town in 
Prospect Park. Paper money don’t do 
us no good at all. You give us all 
enough to eat. We haven’t eaten to- 
day.” 

“But-” 



“That I can handle,” said another 
youth. “We give you the only thing 
we can that you’d understand. Your 
money you can blow your nose in.” 

Lynn Shockley looked upset. Her 
husband was standing in the parlor, 
stammering and confused. His wife 
stood. “I’ll see what the cook can 
spare.” 

“You do that, lady,” said a third 
youth. 

Later, after the gang had left the 
house with what they wanted, plus 
a few of the Shockleys’ more portable 
furnishings, the man and woman sat 
together by the fireplace. Both seemed 
stunned. 

“1 should have seen it coming,” 
said Shockley. “The entertainment 
in the clubs. Starving people degrad- 
ing themselves for money. The New 
Society, they call it in the magazines, 
sitting around sipping coffee and 
watching pre-teen girls being raped 
for cash.” 

“They live in the park,” said Lynn 
Shockley. “They live in tents in the 
streets. They overturn buses and live 
in them. They can’t afford food, so 
they take it. I understand that. We’ve 
had a collapse. But why come here? 
Why can’t they leave us alone?” 

Shockley looked up. He shook his 
head. “Property doesn’t mean any- 
thing anymore, Lynn. 1 just under- 
stood what that means. These people 
go live in a public park because they 
don’t believe in the concept of a 
‘park’ any longer. They become 
squatters on estates because they 
don’t accept private ownership of 
land. They take what they want be- 
cause they don’t think anyone has the 
right to keep what they need from 
them. They could come 
here . any time.” 



86 



GALAXY 




is willing to buy it from you. 1 don’t 
think anyone will be wanting paint- 
ings if this Depression goes on. Or 
gold. Just food, clothing, shelter. 
Maybe not all of those.” 

There was another long silence. 
“Jerry?” Her voice was small and 
very frightened now. “How long be- 
fore we’re downtown selling our- 
selves in the cafes?” 

Jerome Shockley put his arm around 
his wife. “It will be all right,” he 
said. He sighed. He thought about his 
wife and four children. He wondered 
which he’d offer up first. 

-G. A. EFFINGER 

(Continued from page 82) 

and J. G. Taylor of King’s College, London. Writing in the British journal 
Nature, the two researchers report the results of an experiment de- 
signed to measure electromagnetic emissions (over the entire spectral 
range from d.c. to gamma rays) from persons attempting various par- 
apsychological tasks, including telekinesis, dowsing, psychic healing, 
and telepathy. 

ARTIFICIAL PHOTOSYNTHESIS may turn out to be an ideal method 
for utilizing solar energy. Green plants, using water, carbon dioxide, 
and sunlight as inputs and chlorophyll as a catalyst, produce useful 
hydrocarbon fuels (for example, wood). But higher efficiencies and the 
production of fuels with higher energy content may eventually be pos- 
sible with man — made systems. It has long been known that some 
metal salts in an acidic solution will give off hydrogen when exposed 
to ultraviolet light. To drive this reaction with sunlight (in which most of 
the energy is in the visible portion of the spectrum) requires the use of 
sensitizing dyes to absorb the lower — energy photons and transfer the 
energy to the reacting molecules. Additionally, a catalyst — a sort of 
artificial chlorophyll — would be needed to increase the reaction rate to 
commercially usable levels. A number of metal — organic compounds 
seem promising for this application. 

POSITRON EMISSION from the center of our galaxy has been con- 
firmed recently at the Sandia Laboratories in New Mexico. Using in- 
struments on a balloon, the group detected the gamma rays given off 
when the positrons — which are the anti— matter equivalent of electrons 
— encounter normal elefctrons and both are annihilated. The mechanism 
responsible for the production of the positrons remains unknown, but 
possibilities include supernova explosions, the evaporation of primordial 
black holes, or — as always — something not yet suspected. — 

— Greg Chalfln 

87 



They were silent for a moment. A 
radio upstairs played Christmas mu- 
sic. “Jerry?” said Lynn Shockley 
after a while. “Jerry? What about all 
the property you invested in? You put 
a lot of our money in real estate.” 
“It will be gone soon. It won’t be 
worth a thing. Property is worthless, 
money is worthless.” 

“And the gold? And the paint- 
ings?” 

“I thought I was smart,” he said 
bitterly, “because 1 didn’t go into the 
stock market. But something's val- 
uable only as long as someone else 




(Continued from page 61 ) 

Rogers series of nine novels. The rationale covers how Buck Rogers 
was hurtled into the future and why the Venus-and Mars of the old pulps 
exist and not the ones we know today. 

Mr. Niven and Dr. Pournelle are series consultants and plotters; they 
will not do any of the actual writing. The writing will be done by Eric 
Holmes, author of MAHARS OF PELLUCIDAR. The books will be pub- 
lished by Ace. 

Anne McCaffrey is writing music for some of the lyrics she wrote for 
the Dragonrider series. Jon Anderson of the rock group Yes has agreed 
to help her. She thought his music would be appropriate for what she 
had in mind. 

James P. Hogan is at work on a novel tentatively titled MICROPLA- 
NET JANUS. Also in the works is a third novel in the INHERIT THE 
STARS/THE GENTLE GIANTS OF GANYMEDE series. 

C. J. Cherryh is at work on the concluding volume in her GATE OF 
IVREL trilogy. Its title is FIRES OF AZEROTH. 

Gerold Bailey has sold a novel to Berkley, entitled SWORD OF THE 
NURLINGAS. 

In March Dell Books will be bringing out LAND OF UNREASON by 
L. Sprague de Camp and Fletcher Pratt, complete with the original 
Cartier illustrations. This is the first edition of this book to have the 
original illos of the magazine serialization. 

THE BEST OF E. E. “DOC” SMITH will be published by Jove/HBJ 
Books in March. 

Kate Wilhelm will have a novel out this spring entitled JUNIPER TIME. 

Joe Haldeman is working on the first novel of a projected trilogy. He 
is also doing a non-fiction book on space travel for ST. Martin’s Press 
entitled THE ENDLESS HORIZON. 

Cynthia Felice has several new books in the works. 

Mack Reynolds has sold three books to Belmont. 

Bantam is printing Phyllis Gottlieb's new novel, O MASTER CALI- 
BAN, in March. 

Dave Bischoff and Ted White have sold a book to Popular Library. 

Bantam has purchased another LOGAN’S RUN novel. This will be 
the third. 

Octavia Butler is at work on two new novels. 

Chelsea Quinn Yarbro is at work on an occult-mystery novel for Put- 
nam. 

Suzee McKee Charnas is at work on volume three in the MOTH- 
ERLINES series. 

David Gerrold is working on a mainstream novel entitled FOOTNOTE. 

George R. R. Martin and Lisa Tuttle are expanding their story, "THE 
STORMS OF WINDHAVEN,” into a novel. 

Edward Bryant is finishing a novel for Pocket titled IN THE NIGHTIDE. 

David Dvorkin has sold a novel to Pocket, THE ERSATZ MESSIAH. 

— Elton T. Elliott 

88 GALAXY 







by Fred Pohl 



(Synopsis) 



JEM is the first inhabitable planet to be discovered. It possesses not 
one intelligent race but three! 

Earth’s three power blocs (food countries, fuel countries and the poor- 
cousin people’s republics) race to explore and settle it. 

On the way DANNY DALEHOUSE, who comes to love the balloon- 
like inhabitants, meets MARJORIE MENNINGER, strong-willed daugh- 
ter of a rich and politically powerful family; she is determined that she 
herself will be instrumental in winning JEM for the U.S.A. 

After an act of sabotage results in unplanned- for casualties, the 
political situation between the three power blocs on JEM and Earth 
becomes more tense. 

The three intelligent races on JEM are polarized against their will: the 
KRINPIT, crab-like creatures, at first accidentally killed, then deliber- 
ately imprisoned, want to drive all Earthmen from the planet; the BAL- 
LOONISTS, an air-born race secreting a hallucinogenic aphrodisiac, 
mistake the empathetic Dalehouse for a typical representative of his 
nation and align with the Food Bloc; the BURROWERS, a subterranean 
species opposed to any contact with those awful human beings, are 
forced to an alliance with the Fuel Bloc for self-protection. 

And so it goes. 



JEM 



89 




XIV (Cont.) 

Ten minutes later they were both 
back on the beach, lying, not very 
comfortably, on their clothes, wait- 
ing to dry. “Ouch,” said Margie. 
“If I ever get any extra people for 
punishment detail, I think I’ll see if 
they can get the rocks out of this 
sand.” 

“You get used to it.” 

“Only if I have to, Danny. I’m 
going to make this a nice camp if I 
can — good duty. For instance, you 
know what we're going to have to- 
night?” 

He rolled his head to look at her. 
“What?” 

“The first official Jemman 
Food-Exporting Bloc encampment 
dance.” 

“A danced" 

She grinned. “See what I mean? 
Those turkeys who were running 
this place never thought of that. But 
there’s nothing to it: spread out 
some flats on the dirt, put a few 
tapes in the machine and there you 
are. Saturday night special. Best 
thing in the world for morale.” 

“You are probably about the 
U.S. Army’s best colonel for hav- 
ing fun',” Dalehouse said. 

“For all the rest of being a col- 
onel, too, Danny. Don’t you forget 
it. ” 

“Well, I don’t, Margie. I believe 
it. Only it’s kind of hard to re- 
member under the, ah, present cir- 
cumstances.” 

“Well, I’ll put my clothes back 
on if it’ll help you concentrate. This 
isn’t just fun and games. I wanted 
to talk to you. ” 

“About what?” 

“Whatever you want to tell me. 



How you think things are going. 
What isn’t being done that ought to 
be? What you’ve learned being here 
that I haven’t found out yet.” 

He propped himself up on an 
elbow to look at her. She returned 
his gaze serenely, scratching her 
bare abdomen just above the pubic 
hair. “Well,” he said, “I guess 
you’ve seen all the reports about 
making contact with the sentients.” 
“Memorized them, Danny. I 
even saw some of the sentients at 
Detrick, but they weren’t in very 
good condition. Espcially the 
Creepy.” 

“The bunrower? We haven’t had 
very good luck with them.’’ 
“Piss-poor, I’d say.” 

“Well— yes, that’s fair. But we 
did get about ten specimens, two of 
them alive. And Morrissey had a 
whole report on them not transmitted 
yet. He says they’re farmers — from 
underneath, which is kind of an in- 
teresting idea. They plant some kind 
of tubers in the roofs of their tunnels. 
He was planning to talk to that expert 
you were supposed to bring — I don’t 
know her name.” 

“Sondra Leckler? She didn't 
come, Danny. I had her scratched.” 
“Why?” 

“Political. She’s Canadian.” She 
looked at him thoughtfully. “Does 
that fact mean anything to you?” 
“Not a thing.” 

“No, I didn’t think so. Canada 
voted for Peru’s thousand-mile limit 
in the U.N. That’s cozying with the 
Peeps right there. And everybody 
knows Canada’s got the hots for the 
Greasies because of their goddam 
Athabasca tar sands. They’re politi- 
cally unreliable right now, Danny. 
There were four Canadians 



90 



GALAXY 




scheduled for this shipment, and I 
scratched all their asses right off.” 
“That sounds pretty paranoid,” 
he commented. 

‘No, realistic. I’ve got no time to 
teach you the facts of life, Danny. 
What else? I don’t mean about the 
burrowers. ” 

He regarded her thoughtfully. She 
lay on her back, hands behind her 
head, comfortable in her nudity as 
she squinted toward the glowing red 
Kung, For a slightly plump girl her 
waist curved beautifully into her 
hips, and her breasts were rounded 
even while she lay on her back. But 
under that blonde hair was a brain 
Dalehouse did not fully understand. 

He dropped back and said, 
“Well, there’s the balloonists. I 
know the most about them. Our 
regular flock is off toward the Heat 
Pole, but there’s another one out 
over the water. They’re basically 
territorial, but — ” 

“You were at the Greasy camp a 
while ago, weren’t you?” 

“Yeah. When we were still on 
visiting terms. Is that what you 
want me to tell you about?” 
“Among other things.” 

“All right. They’ve got a hell of 
a lot of stuff we don’t, Margie.” He 
described the machine that molded 
building blocks, the plasma 
generator, the farm, the air- 
conditioning, the ice. 

“Sounds pretty nice,” she com- 
mented. “We’ll have all that stuff 
too. Danny, 1 promise you. Did you 
see a plane and four gliders? ’ ’ 

“No. There was an airstrip — 
Cappy commented on it; it didn’t 
make sense, with just a helicopter. 
But they didn’t have a plane then.” 
“They do now. I thought they’d 



sneaked a reinforcement in that you 
didn’t catch. Did you know about 
the base on Farside?” 

"'Far side! You mean the dark 
half of Jem? What the hell would 
anyone want there?” 

“That’s what 1 need to find out. 
But they’ve got it. Why do you 
think I stayed four extra orbits be- 
fore I came down? I made damn 
sure I photo-mapped and radar- 
surveyed everything I could; I know 
every satellite around Jem, I know 
every spot on the surface that’s 
using energy, and I don’t like all of 
what I know. The Farside base was 
a real shock. Did you see any chil- 
dren in the Fat camp?” 

“Children? Hell, no! Why 
would — ” 

“Well, I think they’re moving 
whole families in, Danny, which 
seems to indicate they’ve got more 
than an exploring expedition in 
mind. ” 

“How could you tell whether 
they had children from space?” 

“No way, Danny. 1 didn’t say 
the orbital reconnaissance was the 
only way I knew what was going on 
with the Fats. One other thing. No, 
two. Have they got a baseball 
field?” 

“Baseball?” He was sitting up 
now, staring at her. “What the hell 
would they do with a baseball field? 
Cricket, maybe, and no doubt foot- 
ball, but — ” 

“That’s a break,” she said, 
without explaining. “Last question. 
Did you happen to run into a fellow 
named Tamil?” 

“I don’t think so.” Dalehouse 
thought hard. “Wait a minute. 
Short fellow with a shaved head? 
Chess player?” 



JEM 



91 




“I don’t know. He’s an Indone- 
sian.” 

‘‘Well, I’m not sure, but I think 
there was a petrochemist with a 
name like that. I didn’t talk to him. 
I don’t think he spoke English.” 

“Pity.” Margie ruminated for a 
moment, then sat up, shading her 
eyes. ‘‘Are those your balloonists 
out there?” 

As Dalehouse turned to look, 
Margie was standing, taking a few 
steps toward the shore, and what he 
looked at was not the sky but her. 
The artist Hogarth had said that the 
most beautiful line in nature was the 
curve of a woman’s back, and Mar- 
gie, silhouetted against the ruddy 
sky, was a fine figure of a woman. 
Half-amused, Dalehouse realized by 
the stirrings in his groin that he was 
beginning to display interest. But 
only beginning. The stimulus was 
that beautiful and remembered butt; 
the suppressant was the things she 
said. He would be some little while 
figuring out just how it was he did 
feel about Margie Menninger. 

Then he got his eyes past her, 
and forgot the stirrings. “There are 
ha ’aye ’i out there!” he said furi- 
ously. 




“What’ys?” 

“They’re predators. That’s not 
our regular flock; they just drifted 
in, because of the lights, most 
likely. And those clouds are full of 
ha ’aye ’i!” The flock was close 
enough to be heard now, singing 
loudly, only a few hundred meters 
away. And far beyond and above 
them three slimmer shapes were 
stooping toward them. 

“That’s a what-you-call it, there? 
Jesus! Look at that mother,” she 
cried, as the first of the air-sharks 
expertly ripped at the bag of the 
huge female, slipped past, turned 
end : for-end and reversed itself. It 
came back ten meters lower to catch 
the deflated balloonist as it fell, 
braying its death-song. “That’s a 
fucking Immelmann that thing just 
did! Nobody’s done that since 
World World One!” 

“This isn’t a performance, damn 
it! They’re dying!” Two more of 
the predators had struck and two 
more balloonists were caught, 
farther down the shore. But at least 
it was not Charley’s flock. None of 
those victims were friends. “See 
that stuff coming out of the 
female?” he asked. “Those are her 
eggs. They’re long spider-silk kind 
of things. They’ll float around 
forever, but they won’t be fertilized 
because none of the males have — ” 

“Fuck her eggs, little buddy, I’m 
rooting for the shark! What a killing 
machine! Shit, Danny, I can see 
why things are going badly here. 
You people picked the wrong allies. 
We ought to team up with the 
sharks!” 

Dalehouse was scandalized. 
“They’re animals! They’re not even 
intelligent!” 



92 



GALAXY 



“Show me a professor,” she 
said, “and I’ll show you a fart- 
brain. How intelligent do you have 
to be to fight?” 

“Christ. The balloonists are our 
friends. We’ve got them doing sur- 
veillance for us. The ha ’aye ’i would 
never do that. Now you want us to 
line up with their natural enemies?” 

“Well, I can see there might be 
problems.” She stared wistfully at 
the ha 'aye ’i, which had ripped away 
the inedible bag and was now feast- 
ing on the soft parts of its still liv- 
ing prey. “Too bad,” she said 
philosophically. She stepped back 
toward Danny, still watching the 
spectacle, and took his hand. 
“You’re really sure about this? 
There ’s no way to persuade our 
gooks to get along with the 
sharks?” 

“No way at all! Even if you 
could somehow reach the ha ’aye 'i 
to explain what you wanted. The 
ha ’aye ’i don’t even sing. That’s the 
whole meaning of life to bal- 
loonists. They could never deal with 
creatures that didn’t sing.” 

“Oh?” Margie looked at him 
thoughtfully. Then she released his 
hand and sat down again, leaning 
back on her arms and looking up at 
him. “Tell me, Danny, would you 
like to make me sing?” 

He stared at her. Why, she was 
sexually excited by watching the 
slaughter! 

He glanced at the top of the 
bluff, where the back of the head of 
the orderly was motionless in sight. 
“Maybe we’d better be getting 
back,” he said. 

“What’s the matter, sweetie? 
Don’t like having an audience? 
Tinka won’t bother us.” 



“I don’t care about her.” 

“Then what?” she asked cheer- 
fully. “Hey, I bet I can guess. 
You’re hassled about the colonel.” 
“Tree? He’s got nothing to do 
with me.” 

“Aw, come off it, sweets.” She 
patted the ground beside her. After 
a moment, he sat down, not very 
close. “You think I’ve been getting 
it on with old Nguyen the Tryin’.” 
“No. I don’t think it, I know it.” 
“And suppose 1 have?” 

“Your business,” he said 
promptly. “I’m not saying it isn’t. 
Maybe I’ve got some sexist-pig no- 
tions, but-—” 

“But no maybe. You fucking 
well do, Danny boy.” She was 
smiling without softness now. 

He shrugged. “Let’s go back. 
Colonel.” 

“Let’s stay here. And,” she said, 
“I’ve got the rank on you, and 
when a colonel says ‘let's to a cap- 
tain, what it means is do it.” 

There was no more stirring in 
Dalehouse’s groin; he was both 
angry and amused at his own anger. 
He said, “Let’s get this straight. 
Are you ordering me to fuck you?” 
“No. Not at the moment, dear 
boy.” She grinned. “I hardly ever 
order officers to fuck me. Only en- 
listed men, and very seldom them 
because it’s bad for discipline.” 
“Are you saying the colonel or- 
dered you to fuck him?” 

“Danny dear,” she said pa- 
tiently, “first he couldn’t — I’ve got 
the rank — second, he wouldn’t have 
had to. I’d fuck Guy any time. For 
any reason. Because he’s techni- 
cally my superior officer and I don’t 
want to rub in the fact that I’m the 
one who’s commanding. Because 



JEM 



93 




it’d make things go smoother on the 
mission. Because it’s interesting to 
get it on with somebody half my 
size. I’d fuck a Krinpit if it would 
help the war effort, only I don’t 
know how we’d bring up the kids. 
But,” she said, “a girl’s entitled to 
a certain amount of non-goal- 
oriented recreation, too, and, 
Danny, I have really the fondest 
memories of you from last year in 
Bulgaria. ” 

Fully relaxed, she rummaged 
under her for her clothes and pulled 
out another joint. 

Dalehouse watched her lighting 
it. Her body was tanned over every 
inch; no bikini marks, and looking a 
lot better than the fishbelly white 
that came after a while on Jem. She 
scratched between the crease that 
hid her' navel and her pale pubic 
hair, exhaled peacefully and passed 
him the joint. The thing was, 
Dalehouse conceded to himself, that 
he had really the fondest memories 
of her last year in Bulgaria, too, 
and it did not seem to matter that he 
had also some bad memories. “You 
know the thing , that gets me about 
you?” he asked. “You make me 
laugh about a hundred different 
ways. Lean over this way, will 
you?” 

When they had used each other 
up, they rested for a moment. Then 
Margie jumped up and dashed into 
the water again. Dalehouse fol- 
lowed; they splashed and roared; 
and as they came out he was as- 
tonished to discover that suddenly 
he didn’t feel quite used up any 
more. But Margie was calling up 
the bluff: “Tinka! Time hack!” 

“Thirteen twenty hours, 
ma’am!” 



Margie slipped into her fatigues 
quickly, and leaned over to kiss 
Dalehouse as he was standing with 
one leg in his pants. “Time to get 
back. I’ve got a busy afternoon be- 
fore the dance and, Danny, I’d ap- 
preciate it if you’d do something for 
me.” 

“What’s that?” 

“Teach Tinka how to do that bal- 
loon thing this afternoon.” 

“Why?” 

“I want her to run an errand for 
me. It’s important.” 

He considered. “I can get her 
started, anyway. But I don’t know 
if she can learn it all in a few 
hours.” 

“She leams fast, I promise. 
Come on — I’ll race you back!” 

They ran the hundred meters. 
Marge got off first, but by the time 
the outpost was in sight Dalehouse 
had caught up with her. As he 
passed she reached out and took his 
hand and pulled him back to a 
walk. “Thanks for the exercise,” 
she panted. 

“Which exercise, swimming, 
running, or fucking?” 

“All of them, dear Danny.” She 
breathed hard and then, just before 
they got within earshot of the 
perimeter guards, she halted him. 
“One thing I ought to mention to 
you,” she said. 

“What’s that?” 

“I just want to set the record 
straight. With Nguyen Tree I’m 
fucking. With you I was making 
love.” 

★ 



94 



GALAXY 




Twelve on perimeter guard, two in 
sickbay, three in the comm shack 
and eight others on the other 
twenty-four-hour details that always 
had to be manned; that left over a 
hundred and twenty people in the 
Food camp and nearly every one of 
them was at the dance. Marge con- 
gratulated herself as she flung 
through a hora. It was a big suc- 
cess. When the dance ended and the 
rhythm changed to something Latin, 
she shook off the three men who 
came toward her. “I’ve got to sit 
this one out and catch my breath,” 
she said. “After the next number I 
make my little speech. Then you’re 
all on. ” 

She retreated behind the little 
stand and sat crosslegged on the 
ground, breathing deeply. Marge 
Menninger’s parents had endowed 
her with good genes and she had 
taken care of her equipment; after a 
long day and a solid hour’s dancing 
she was ‘not tired and her wits were 
still about her. And the day had 
been not only long but good. She 
had got the camp over their scare 
about the loss of the three people by 
treating it as if it didn’t matter. She 
had brought them all together in the 
dance. She had started the 
groundwork for Tinka's little mis- 
sion, organized an effective 
perimeter guard, broken the back of 
the job of unloading and stowing 
cargo and begun six other tasks 
equally important. And she had got 
it on with Dan Dalehouse, on terms 
of her own making but obviously 
acceptable to him. That was a per- 
sonal matter, but not unimportant. 
Marge was careful to keep an eye 
on long-range prospects. And as a 
possible permanent future pair, if 



permanent pairing turned out to be 
the way things were going to go on 
Jem, Dalehouse was the best bet 
she had yet identified. 

It was Marge Menninger’s con- 
viction, recent but certain, that this 
job was what she had been bom 
for. The important thing was to do 
it the right waiy , which was her own 
way, which had to be laid out from 
day one. No false starts. A happy 
camp — plenty of work to keep them 
busy, and plenty of time to enjoy 
themselves. And a productive camp. 
Jem belonged to her 'and hers and 
now they had it. 

While she was waiting for the 
cha-cha to end, she considered the 
next day. Ship One would be 
empty, and a team could be started 
on separating the two halves and 
moving them into position in the 
perimeter. Dalehouse or Kap- 
pelyushnikov — which? The Russian, 
she decided — Kappelyushnikov 

could be briefed on Tinka’s mis- 
sion, or at least enough of it 
so that he could escort her part way 
to the Greasy camp. A work team 
could be organized to start putting 
up poles for the farm plot. She 
would meet, and learn to know, at 
least six of the advance party; in 
two weeks, she should know ev- 
erything she had to know about ev- 
eryone in the camp. Orders would 
be cut naming Guy Tree as her G-l 
and Santangelo as G-2; the others 
she would wait on, since there 
might be people she hadn’t met yet 
who should have the jobs. And, if 
things went well, during the three 
hours she allowed herself for a 
mid-day break, she would go for a 
walk in the woods. And finally, she 
would make a first approximation of 



JEM 



95 




a requisition list tor the next ship- 
ment from Earth. That couldn’t 
wait. With all the fuss the civilians 
were kicking up. Marge Menninger 
wasn't sure how many more ship- 
ments there would be. She already 
knew a number of goodies she 
wanted, but the old-timers would 
probably think of more. So she 
would need to talk to some of the 
old-timers. Morrissey, Krivitin, 
Kappelyushnikov — she would fill in 
the others later. 

The smell of pot from beyond the 
stand pleased her. She thought of 
lighting up before getting up to 
make her speech — it was another 
way of showing her personal style. 
But it had been less than half an 
hour since the last one, and Marge 
knew her tolerances exactly; it 
might make her fuzzy. 

The cha-cha ended and the girl at 
the tape machine, looking toward 
Margie, switched it off. Marge 
nodded and climbed the stand. 

The laughter and buzz dwindled 
as the hundred-odd people turned to 
face her. She smiled out at them for 
a moment, waiting for silence. They 
looked exactly like the plebes at 
West Point had looked, exactly like 
the audience in the Senate hearing 
room, like every audience she had 
ever faced. Marge was in touch 
with her audiences; she could al- 
ways make them like her, and for 
that reason she liked them. She 
said, “Welcome to the first weekly 
Food Bloc Expedition Saturday 
Night Dance. I’m Colonel Marjorie 
Menninger, U.S.A., and I’m your 
camp commander. Some of us al- 
ready know each other pretty well 
by now. The rest of us are going to 
get to know each other very well, 

96 



very soon, because when you come 
right down to it we don’t have 
much choice, do we? I’m not wor- 
ried about that, and I hope you’re 
not. We’re a pretty select bunch.” 
She allowed her gaze to drift past 
the audience to the edge of the 
lighted area, where two of her 
grunts were holding another while 
he vomited, and added, “ — 
Although you might not know that 
at first.” A small laugh, but 
genuine. “So let’s start getting to 
know each other. Guy? Saint? 
Where are you?” She introduced 
Tree and Santangelo as they stood 
forth. “Now Vince Cudahy — are 
you there? Vince is a mathemati- 
cian, but he’s also our chaplain. He 
used to teach at Fordham, but he’s 
agreed to be non-denominational for 
the purposes of this mission. So if 
any of you want to get married, 
Vince is authorized to do it.” Small 
chuckle. “He’s a little old- 
fashioned, so he’d prefer it if you’re 
of different sexes.” Somewhat 
larger laugh, but a little questioning 
note in it. “And in case you do,” 
she went on, “or even if you don’t, 
you ought to meet Chiche Ar- 
kashvili. Cheech? There she is, our 
medical officer. Try not to get sick 
over the next twenty-four hours, be- 
cause she’s still setting up. But then 
she’ll be ready for business, and 
back home in Ordjonikidze her spe- 
cialty was obstetrics.” No laugh at 
all this time. She hadn’t expected 
one. She gave them a moment to 
draw the logical conclusion, and 
then pressed it home. “As you can 
see, we’re planning a permanent 
base, and I’m planning to make this 
the best duty any of you have ever 
had, so that a lot of you will want 



GALAXY 




to re-up and stay here. And if you 
do — and if any of you take seri- 
ously what I’ve just been talking 
about and decide to settle down and 
have a family on Jem, I’m offering 
a special prize. A thousand petro- 
bucks for the first baby bom in our 
camp — provided you name it Mar- 
jorie, after me.” She waited a beat 
and. added, “Two thousand if it’s a 
boy.” She got the laugh she 
wanted, and closed it out: “Now, 
on with the dance.” And as the 
music started she jumped off the 
platform, grabbed the first man in 
reach and started them all going. 

★ 



For the next half hour. Marge Men- 
ninger played hostess, at which she 
was very, very good. She danced 
with the men who didn’t much 
dance, kept the music going, made 
sure the drinks kept coming. What 
she wanted was for everybody to 
have a good time. The next day 
would be time enough for them to 
start thinking about permanent col- 
onies, and how much choice they 
would be likely to have about ex- 
tending their stay. When chance 
permitted, she got a word in with 
the people who had known what she 
was going to say, asking how they 
thought it had gone. It seemed to 
have gone well. It made her feel 
good, and she found she was really 
enjoying the party. She drank with 
the drinkers, smoked with the dop- 
ers and danced with everyone. It 
was safe enough, now. When the 
time came to shut the dance down 
Tinka would let her know, and 



meanwhile Tinka would keep an 
eye on her colonel. 

Coming back from the brand-new 
latrine. Marge paused to enjoy the 
sight of her people having fun. It 
was going to be all right! They re- 
ally were a good bunch, hand- 
selected, fit, well-trained. Whatever 
she had said to anyone else, in a 
secret, inside part of her heart 
Marge had felt a small but unsettl- 
ing fear that her first really inde- 
pendent command might take qual- 
ities she hadn’t known she needed. 
So far, not. So far, everything was 
going precisely as she had planned, 
according to the priorities she had 
laid out in her own mind: Priority 
1 , safeguard the integrity of the 
unit. And it was safeguarded; she 
could see the perimeter guards in 
regular patrol, a little disgruntled at 
missing the dance but carrying out 
their orders meticulously. Priority 2, 
accomplish the mission assigned. 
And that was well on the way. 
Priority 3, subject to accomplishing 
I and 2, make it a busy and happy 
camp. And that looked good, too. 

She walked around the outskirts 
of the dance, nodding and smiling, 
not yet quite ready to get back on 
the floor. Tinka appeared beside 
her, one hand on her government- 
issue pouch, looking questioningly 
at her. Marge shook her head. She 
didn’t need another joint just then. 
She was feeling happy and relaxed, 
but just the littlest bit light-headed. 
Part of it was the smarmy heat and 
the peculiar instability that weighing 
only about three-quarters of what 
she had been used to for ten years 
gave her. But she was feeling a lit- 
tle edgy, too, and checking dates in 
her mind she thought she knew 



JEM 



97 




why. When she came near the med- 
ical officer she said in her ear, 
“Got your freezers going for the 
sperm and ovum bank yet, Doc? 
Because I think I’m going to make 
a donation. ” 

“Noon tomorrow we’ll be re- 
ady,” Chiche Arkashvili promised. 
“But the way the boys and girls 
have been disappearing into the 
bushes, I don’t know if we’ll need 
it.” 

‘ ‘Better to have it and not need it 
than need it and not have it. If I 
could, I’d—” 

She stopped. “What would you 
do, Colonel?” 

“Forget it. Don’t let me keep 
you from urgent business,” said 
Marge amiably, and watched the 
doctor go on toward the latrine. If 
she could, she’d get a whole stock 
of frozen sperm and ova from 
Earth, because the bigger the gene 
pool you started with the better the 
chances you’d have a healthy, sta- 
ble population in another two or 
three generations. But she was not 
quite ready to put that request on 
her next letter to Santa Claus. She 
would have quite enough trouble 
with the items she was already de- 
termined to requisition, and from 
Christ’s own number of light-years 
away her powers of argument were 
limited. 

A few meters away the Bulgarian 
girl was in some sort of altercation 
with Stud Sweggert, the sergeant 
Marge had put onto the first of her 
ships. Normally she wouldn’t have 
interfered, but there was something 
she wanted from Dimitrova. 
“Tinka,” she said softly over her 
shoulder. 

“Yes’m.” 



“Stay with.” Marge went up to 
the arguing couple, who stopped as 
she came close. “Sorry to break 
this up,” she said. 

Dimitrova glared at her. Feisty 
little prunt; it crossed Marge’s mind 
that her first impulses about Ana 
Dimitrova might have been best, 
but it was not a useful thought any 
more. She discarded it. 

“There is nothing to break up, 
Colonel,” the girl said. “The 
sergeant wished to show me some- 
thing I did not want to see. ” 

“I bet he did, honey,” Marge 
smiled. “Will you excuse us a sec- 
ond, Sergeant?” And, when he was 
out of earshot, she asked, “How is 
your Indonesian, Dimitrova?” 
“Indonesian? It is not one of my 
four-oh languages, but I believe I 
could translate a document satisfac- 
torily.” 

“I don’t want a document trans- 
lated. I want to know how to say, 
‘Good morning. Where is the 
baseball park?’ ” 

“What?” 

“Shit, lady! Just tell us how to 
say it.” 

Ana hesitated, then, with some 
disdain, said, " Selamat pagi, di- 
mana lapangan baseball?” 

“Um.” Marge rehearsed it to 
herself for a moment, glancing at 
Tinka. The orderly shrugged. 
“Well, write it down for me. Now, 
how do you say, ‘Have you a 
map?’ ” 

“ Saudara punja petal ” 

“Got that?” asked Marge, look- 
ing at the orderly. “Not sure? All 
right, Dimitrova, take Tinka to my 
office and write it out for her. Make 
sure she gets it right.” For a mo- 
ment she thought the Bulgarian 



98 



GALAXY 




might object, but then she nodded 
and the two of them started away. 

Sergeant Sweggert was still stand- 
ing there, three meters away, watch- 
ing her with calm interest. Margie 
laughed. “What are you doing. 
Sergeant, waiting to ask me for a 
dance? Or do you want to show me 
that little thing you were so anxious 
to drag out for Dimitrova?” 

“Hell, Colonel. You’ve got me 
all wrong.” 

“I bet 1 do. Sweggert,” she said 
good-naturedly, “you’re not a bad 
guy, but it’s against my policy to, 
ah, fraternize with enlisted men. 
Except in an emergency, of course. 
And what you’ve got to show has 
been widely seen already, I guaran- 
tee you.” 

“Ah, no, Colonel! It was educa- 
tional. They got a tame gasbag 
here, and it’s real interesting.” 

“Yeah?” She looked at him 
more closely, and from the way he 
stood, the way his head sank into 
his shoulders, she realized that the 
man was pretty full of something. 
But he was also R.A, and, whether 
they chose to call the present time 
night or day, as a practical matter. 
Rung made it pretty close to broad 
daylight. "I’ll take a look,” she 
decided. She followed him behind 
the cooktent, and there was one of 
the balloonists, clinging to a rope 
and singing softly and mournfully to 
itself. It was much bigger than the 
female she had seen at Camp De- 
trick, but obviously in some sort of 
trouble. 

“What’s it saying?” she de- 
manded. 

The sergeant said with a straight 
face, “I really don’t know, ma’am. 
You want to hold him a minute? 



Just pull down on the rope.” 

Margie looked at him thought- 
fully for a moment, but he was 
right, it was interesting. She pulled 
on the rope, “Damn thing’s 
strong,” she complained. “Hey, 
Sweggert! What are you doing?” 

He had leaned down and pulled 
something out from under a tar- 
paulin. “Just a strobe light, 
ma’am. ” 

“And what are you going to do 
with it?” 

“Well,” he said cunningly, “I 
haven’t never seen it, but the guys 
say if you give one of these things a 
flash it’s real interesting.” 

She looked from him to the sad, 
wrinkled face of the balloonist and 
back. “Sergeant,” she said grimly, 
“it damn better be or I’ll have your 
ass on toast. Flash your fucking 
strobe.” 

“Is that an order, ma’am?” 
“Flash it!” she snarled. “Or — ” 
And then he did. 

XV 

After four days of trying Ana was 
finally granted permission to use the 
radio for a call to the People’s 
camp. When the communications 
clerk signaled GO she leaned for- 
ward and spoke in Urdu into the 
mircrophone. “This is Ana Dimit- 
rova calling, from the camp of the 
Food-Exporting Bloc. I wish to 
speak to Ahmed Dulla, please.” 

The comm-clerk switched off the 
microphone and said, “Now you 
wait. It usually takes about ten 
minutes for a return message.” 
“Message? Can I not speak di- 
rectly to Dr. Dulla?” 

“Not with the Peeps, honey. We 



JEM 



99 




transmit a message, they transmit an 
answer. If they feel like it.” 

“How very queer. Well, thank 
you, I will wait outside.” As she 
left she added, “Please call me 
when the answer comes.” 

“Count on it, sweets.” 

What a nuisance, she thought 
crossly, sitting cross-legged in the 
warm electric-heater glow from 
Kung overhead. Still — ten minutes! 
She had waited much longer than 
ten minqtes to hear Ahmed’s voice. 
And at least his plight could no 
longer be as serious as she had 
feared at first. The word was out in 
camp that the People’s Republics, 
through what superhuman exertions 
one could hardly imagine, had suc- 
ceeded in reestablishing communica- 
tion with their outpost on Jem. A 
ship had landed. A small one, to be 
sure, but at least they were no 
longer helplessly dependent on the 
other colonies for the means to sur- 
vive. How that must have angered 
Dulla! 

Around her the camp was very 
busy. Nearly a hectare had been 
cleared and seeded on the slopes 
above, and the stanchions were in 
place for the lights that would make 
the seeds grow. Power would be 
next, and that was already being at- 
tended to. The Food bloc at last Mad 
its own solar-power plant in process 
of assembly, and meanwhile there 
was a nuclear-fueled steam plant al- 
ready in operation — small, expen- 
sive, but reliable. 

Ana was the best of the three 
translators in the camp and, since 
the disappearance of Harriet San- 
tori, the only one who seemed capa- 
ble of picking up the fine structure 
of an only partly understood lan- 



guage. Her Krinpit was quite imper- 
fect, and there seemed little chance 
to practice it. For the burrowers she 
had spent much time with this 
James Morrissey, who seemed to 
have taken them as his personal rea- 
son for existence, but none of it 
had come to much. The mic- 
rophones he insinuated so gently 
into the tunnels sometimes picked 
up a scrap or two of squealing, clut- 
tering, half-muffled sounds, but 
evidently the burrowers detected 
them at once and avoided them. 
When they didn’t steal them. More 
than once, Morrissey had pulled out 
a probe and found the working head 
neatly disconnected. 

But with the balloonist she had 
become almost fluent. She had 
worked closely with Professor 
Dalehouse — so far only by radio; 
the intriguing but frightening pros- 
pect of soaring with him under a 
cluster of bags of hydrogen was for 
some indeterminate time in the fu- 
ture. Then the Russian pilot, Kap- 
pelyushnikov, had taken off with 
Colonel Menninger’s orderly and a 
cluster of hydrogen tanks on some 
foolish, secretive errand, and she 
had been ordered off the radio until 
further notice. Instead she was as- 
signed to clerical work in the tiny 
hospital, where there was in fact no 
clerical work to speak of, since it 
had as yet no real patients. 

But. Regardless. No matter what 
small frustrations and annoyances, 
was she not on Jem, only a matter 
of a few score kilometers at most 
from Ahmed? Not to mention the 
dizzying excitement of being on 
Jem at all. Another planet! Circling 
another star! So far from home that 
not even the sun itself could be 



100 



GALAXY 




found in the ruddy Jemman sky! 
She had not yet dared to go out into 
the jungle (though others had, and 
returned safe and excited at the 
strangenesses they had seen). She 
had not yet even swum in that great 
lake, or sea, so temptingly near; she 
had not thought to bring a bathing 
suit, had not yet found time to 
make one, and certainly would not 
follow the custom of those others 
who frolicked in nothing at all 
along the beach. Just now she could 
see a batch of them splashing and 
shouting. They were supposed to be 
working on the hydroplanes which 
were being assembled at the water’s 
edge, but their thoughts, she would 
warrant, were far less on transporta- 
tion than on the animal joy of the 
beach. 

Not, she thought justly, that that 
in itself was wrong; why should 
they not? It was not Ana’s concern 
if other persons had different moral 
standards than her own, so long as 
they did not try to inflict them on 
her. And splashing would in fact be 
great fun in this muggy heat — 

“Dimitrova!” She jumped up and 
ran inside the tent for her answer, 
but it was only: 

“Ahmed Dulla is not available at 
present. The message will be given 
to him.” 

In English. And English with a 
very bad accent, at that; whatever 
Heir-of-Mao had sent, it was not 
good translators. She thanked the 
comm-clerk, concealing her disap- 
pointment, and strolled toward the 
perimeter. Off duty, not enough 
time to eat, too early to sleep; what 
should she do since she could not 
do the thing she wanted most? 

Really, it was too disappointing! 




Where could he be? 

She was annoyed to discover that 
she was beginning another 
headache. How infuriating! For 
some reason she had not had very 
many in her first days on Jem — 
perhaps because everything was so 
intensely exciting that she had no 
time to think of headaches. She did 
not want one now. Ana was an in- 
dustrious person by nature, and it 
occured to her that idleness was not 
likely to prevent the headache but 
only to make it worse. What to do? 
If she only had a proper costume, 
how agreeable it would be to help 
the boat-builders on the beach. Or 
to climb the slope and assist in 
planting — but no, at the moment 
they were only plowing, and she 
did not know how to run to tractor. 
The power plant. She knew nothing 
of it, of course, but she had sturdy 
limbs and a willingness to use her 
muscles, why not? 

Unfortunatley, as she approached 
she discovered that one of the non- 
coms working on the project was 
Sgt. Sweggert. 

She changed course and walked 

101 



JEM 




briskly away. 

She had avoided Sweggert since 
that night she had come back with 
the colonel’s orderly and found the 
two of them in rut, out in the open, 
for all to see! Of course, no others 
had seen. Nan turned away at once, 
sweating with embarrassment, and 
there had been no one else, or all 
the camp would have been talking 
of it. Tinka would not speak, 

Sweggert would have been talking 
of it. Tinka would not speak, 

Sweggert would perhaps not dare 
to, and the colonel — Well, Ana did 
not have the delusion that she un- 
derstood the colonel. But Colonel 
Marge Menninger she had not been 
able to avoid, and the woman had 
said nothing of the incident, had in 
fact showed no signs that it had 
ever taken place. That bleached 
American, copulating with a man 
whose name she perhaps did not 
even know! No, that was unfair; 
they knew each other. But certainly 
not socially. Oh, yes, to be sure, 
she would blame it on the 
aphrodisiac effect of the — the mist, 
she put it to herself, that the 
wounded balloonist emitted. One 
had heard all about that by now. 
Still, how appallingly lewd! Not to 
say — what was the word? — 
“tacky.” 

Ana found herself at a guard post 
in the perimeter fence, and at once 
it became clear what she wished to 
do. “I am going for a walk,” she 
told the corporal in charge, who 
shrugged and watched impassively 
as Ana squeezed between the 
strands of the barbed wire. 

In a few steps she was out of 
sight of the camp. 

If she could not see Ahmed, at 



least she could see Jem. She pushed 
through the violet-oily growth, here 
all flickering with blue-green lights, 
and paused to listen. Tiny skittering 
sounds from the underbrush, the 
rustle of the plants in the wind. 
There was no wild life here that 
would harm her, she had been as- 
sured. Because of the presence of 
the camp, there were not many 
animals at all. Some had been 
frightened away, some poisoned; 
where the garbage details had 
brought a day’s collection of slops 
into the woods and buried them you 
could see the ferns withered, the 
crab-grass ground cover dry. Ter- 
restrial biochemistry was as hostile 
to Jemmans as the other way 
around, but the Jemmans had not 
had a Camp Detrick to make them 
salves and injections against the rot. 

But what was left, how fascinat- 
ing and how strange! Forests of 
plants like ferns, but fruiting and 
with woody stems. Succulents, al- 
most like bamboo; the hollow stems 
would make good structural mate- 
rials, and Ana’s thrifty soul in- 
structed her to tell the colonel not to 
waste precious iron on tent stakes 
any more. Vines like grapes, with 
hard seeds, no doubt meant to be 
spread in the excrement of small 
animals. (If any survived in this 
part of the forest.) And the 
mangrove-like giants called 
“many-trees,” a dozen or more 
trunks linking together at the crown, 
that made a canopy under which she 
moved. 

She stopped and looked around. 
There was no -question of getting 
lost, she reassured herself, as long 
as she kept the red-glinting water in 
sight on her left. At any time she 



102 



GALAXY 




could simply climb down to it and 
return along the beach. 

And there was no question of 
being tired here, either, when one 
climbed so lightly over fallen logs 
and rocks. It was an excellent time 
for taking a nature stroll, she 
thought, squirming between the 
trunks of a many-tree that glittered 
blue-green in firefly beads, if only 
her head did not hurt so. 

In front of her was a lump of 
fungus, gray-pink and without lights 
of its own. It looked quite like a 
brain, she thought. In fact, rather 
like her own. Since the brain- 
splitting had been done under local 
anesthesia she had seen every step, 
some in the mirror overhead, some 
in the closed-circuit likris screen. 
That was how her brain had seemed 
to her, quite remote and unfeeling. 
Even when the sharp hooked blade 
had halved it in one smooth motion 
it had been hard to connect that 
sight with the insistent dragging 
pressure that was all she felt.... 
Later, when they were reconnecting 
some of the necessary nerves, she 
suddenly felt the reality of it. She 
would have been ill except for the 
surgeon’s motherly scorn. “A great 
strong girl like you!” she had 
laughed. ‘‘No. Nonsense! You will 
not vomit.” And Nan had not.... 

What was that noise? 

It sounded like distant sticks rat- 
tling against hollow logs, and some- 
one moaning. It was the sort of 
sound she had heard before, on 
tapes at Camp Detrick. The crusta- 
ceans, yes! But perhaps not the so- 
cial race. Perhaps those wild and 
surely dangerous ones that had been 
only rumored — 

The human voice that came from 



behind her was severe. “Is it sensi- 
ble for you to be alone here. Ana?” 
In Urdu! With that stem compas- 
sion she had heard so often! She 
knew before she turned that it was 
Ahmed. 

★ 



An hour later, a kilometer away, 
she lay in his arms, unwilling to 
move lest she wake him. The Krin- 
pit’s sound was always audible, 
sometimes near, sometimes moving 
farther away; she smiled to herself 
as she thought that the creature had 
surely been near while they were 
making love. No matter. It was not 
a matter for shame, what she would 
proclaim anywhere. It was not at all 
like that American bleached blonde, 
because — well, of course, because it 
was with Ahmed. 

He twitched, snorted and woke 
up. “Ah, Ana! Then I did not 
dream this!” 

“No, Ahmed.” She hesitated, 
and then said in a softer voice, 
“But I have had that dream many 
times.... No! Not so quickly again, 
please, dear Ahmed — or, yes, 
whenever you like; but first let me 
look at you.” She shook her head 
and scolded, “You are so thin! 
Have you been ill?” 

The black-bead eyes were 
opaque. “111? Yes, sometimes. Also 
sometimes starving.” 

“Starving! How terrible! But — ” 
“But why starve? That is simple 
to answer. Because your people 
shot down our transports.” 

“But that is quite impossible!” 

“It is not impossible,” he con- 



JEM 



103 




tradicted, “because it happened. 
Food for many days, scientific in- 
struments, two ships — and thirty- 
'four human beings, Ana.” 

“It must have been an accident.” 
“You are naive.” He got up an- 
grily, pulling his clothes together. 
“I do not blame you. Ana. But 
those crimes are a fact, and I must 
blame someone.” He disappeared 
behind a many-tree, and after a 
moment she could hear the splash- 
ing of his urine against the bole. 

And also another sound: the 
Krinpit’s rattle and moan, growing 
close again. If only she had had 
more time with the tapes at Detrick! 
But even so, she could distinguish a 
pattern that was repeated over and 
over. Sssharrn- And then two quick 
notes: eye-gone. 

She called weakly, “Ahmed?” 
And heard his laugh. “Ah, Ana, 
does my friend frighten you? He 
will not harm us. We axe not good 
for him to eat.” 

“I did not know you had such 
friends.” 

“Well, perhaps I have not. No. 
We are not friends. But as I am the 
enemy of his enemies, we are allies 
at least. Come along, Sham-igon,” 
he said, like a householder strolling 
a puppy, and came back into view. 

Scuttling lopsidedly behind him 
was a great nightmare creature, 
rattling and moaning. Ana had 
never been so close to an adult, live 
Krinpit, had never quite realized 
their size and the loudness of their 
sounds. It did not have a crab’s 
claws. It had jointed limbs that 
waved above it, two that tapered to 
curved points like a cat’s claw, two 
that ended in fist-like masses of 
shell. 

104 



It paused, seeming to regard Nan, 
although as far as she could tell it 
had no eyes. And among the sounds 
she recognized words in Urdu! Syl- 
lable by syllable, it scratched and 
grumbled out a sentence: 

“Is this one to die?” 

“No, no!” said Ahmed quickly. 
“She is — ” He hesitated, then emit- 
ted sounds in the Krinpit language. 
Perhaps it was his accent, but Ana 
could not understand a word. “I 
have told him you are my he-wife,” 
he explained. 

“He-wife?” 

“They have a very rich sexual 
life,” he said. 

“Please, Ahmed. I am not ready 
for a joking little chat. The Krinpit 
said ‘to die,’ and what does it 
mean?” 

“Naive Ana,” he said again, 
looking at her thoughtfully. Then he 
shrugged. He did not reply, but he 
unwrapped a flat ruddy-brown leaf 
from an object he had been carry- 
ing. It was a flat metal blade, 
broader at the end, the edge razor- 
sharp. The hilt was sized to fit a 
man’s hand, and the whole thing 
half a meter long. 

“Ahmed! Is that a sword?” 

“A machete. But, you are right, 
it is a sword also now.” 

“Ahmed,” she said, her heart 
pounding harder than the throbbing 
in her head, “some days ago three 
persons from the Food camp were 
killed. I have thought it was an ac- 
cident, but now I am not sure. Shall 
I ask you if you know anything of 
this?” 

“Ask what you like, woman.” 

“Tell me!” 

He thrust the machete into the 
loamy ground. “All right, if you 

GALAXY 




will have it so, I will tell you. No. 
I did not kill those Fats. But yes, I 
know of their death, I do not mourn 
them, I hope many more will die. 
And if it is necessary for me to kill 
a few I shall not shrink from it!” 

‘‘But — but — but Ahmed,” she 
babbled, “dear, gentle Ahmed, this 
is murder! Worse than murder, it is 
an act of war! Suppose the Food 
bloc retaliates? Suppose our home- 
lands do not accept this as a mere 
struggle far away, but themselves 
retaliate on each other? Suppose — ” 

“Have done with your suppos- 
ing!” he shouted. “What can they 
do to retaliate? Bomb Pakistan? Let 
them! Let them destroy Hyderabad 
and Multan, let them bomb 
Karachi, let them wipe out all the 
cities and bum the whole coast. 
You have been there,' Ana, how 
much of Pakistan can be destroyed? 
What bombs can blast through 
mountains? The people will survive. 
The leeches that flock to the cities 
to beg, the government parasites — 
yes, the intellectuals, the proud 
bloodsuckers like you and me — 
what do I care if they all die? The 
people in tJie valleys will live!” 

She was silent, frightened, 
searching for words that might sway 
him and finding none. “Ah,” he 
said in disgust, “what is the sense 
of this? But do not be angry with 
me.” 

“Angry? That is not what I 
feel,” she said miserably. 

“Then what? Hatred? Fear? Ana, 
w hat are we to do?Let them starve 
us? We have one small ship to save 
us, and what have the Fats and the 
Greasies? Navies! And if the fight- 
* n g spreads — ” He hesitated, and 
then burst out: “Let it! Let all the 

JEM 



rich ones kill each other, what do 
we care? Remember, six out of ten 
human beings on Earth are ours! If 
there is war on Earth — if only a 
million survive, then six hundred 
thousand of them will be citizens of 
the People’s Republics. And 
here — ” 

She shook her head, almost 
weeping. “And here? Sixty per cent 
too?” 

“No. More. On Son of Kung, if 
anyone survives — one hundred per 
cent ours.” 

XVI 

The rains were all around, squall 
clouds driving past them, up toward 
the Heat Pole, where the rain that 
dropped from them fell a kilometer 
or two and evaporated, never striking 
the hot, salt ground. The flock was 
spread out over a kilometer of sky, 
grumbling in dissonant chords. “Have 
patience,” Charlie scolded them. 
“We must stay, must stay.” 

They echoed, “Must stay,” but it 
was poorly sung. No matter. Charlie 
had promised his two-legged friend 
that they would stay, waiting to ob- 
serve certain strange and incompre- 
hensible events, and the flock would 
do as he vowed. 

Still, it was uncomfortable, like an 
itch or a sunburn to a human being, 
to have the swarm in such disarray. 
The place he had promised to watch 
was upwind of the Camp of the Big 
Sun. It did not do to come too close 
to that. Many of his flock, and more 
of other flocks, had been punctured 
or burned by the far-striking missiles 
of that camp; so he had to keep the 
flock from drifting toward it, seeking 
every counter-flowing gust, and still 



105 




avoid the squalls as much as possible. 
Dalehouse had told him that it would 
be difficult. But he had also said it 
was important. 

Charlie rotated his eye-patches over 
the horizon. No sign of the aircraft 
he had been told to expect. But he 
did see a vagrant drift of thistledown 
and spinner-silk moving across the 
hills below. A cross-current! He sang 
his flock together and vented gas. 

They followed, dropping to a level 
where the wind took them away from 
the rain, to a likely area of updraft. 
They followed well, everything con- 
sidered. Expertly he guided them un- 
der the base of a fair-weather cumulus, 
and they rose with the drift. 

The song of the swarm became 
contented. It was at the top of these 
pillars of rising air that the best feed- 
ing was found: pollen and butterfly- 
seed capsules, the small, soft crea- 
tures that filled the same ecological 
niche that insects did on Earth, dried 
salt particles from the wavelets of 
landlocked seas, even tinier things. 
A flock at feed was queer looking, 
every fin and frill extended to trap 
whatever touched it. It was also at 
risk, or once would have been. It was 
a favorite time for the ha’aye’i to 
knife in, slashing every bag they 
passed, and tearing the life out of 
victims before the helpless gaze of 
flockmates. Helpless no more! Char- 
lie sang a boastful song of his great 
friend, Danny, who had given them 
the far-striking weapons that drove 
the ha’aye’i a hundred clouds away. 
Or sometimes did. Now each male 
and some of the females had the 
weapons in his own flock, and the 
ha’aye’i had come to recognize Char- 
lie’s swarm and avoid it. 

Although, in truth, it was no longer 

106 



as tempting to predators as it once 
had been. So few left! Once there had 
been hundreds, now fewer than a 
score. 

There was still no aircraft on the 
horizon, nothing on the mesa upwind 
of the Camp of the Big Sun. Charlie 
relaxed, fed with his swarm, and as 
he ate, became more mellow. He led 
the flock in gentle songs of childhood 
and joy. 

There was a time when Charlie had 
been a tiny pip-sized pod, pumping 
mightily to bulge the creases out of 
his little gasbag, still tied to the rag- 
ged end of his sailing-ribbon and to 
the winds that bore it where they li- 
ked. Gusts blew. Air-to-air lightning 
spat all around him. Because he had 
no real control over his altitude, he 
was sometimes tossed up through the 
tops of towering convection clouds, 
the dull red sun hot on his tiny bal- 
loon, actual stars shining through the 
murky sky; sometimes so low that he 
brushed hills and fern-trees, and 
shelled or furred creatures clutched 
after him as he spun by. Eighty out 
of a hundred of his brood-mates died 
then, in some way or another. Ten 
more died soon as their drift-ribbons 
fell away, tasty hors-d’oeuvres for 
the ha'aye’i, or even for the protein- 
hungry adults of another chance-met 
flock. Or even their own. Only a few 
out of each hundred survived to re- 
produce. And then there were still the 
ha’aye’i. And the storms. And the 
clutching beasts from below. 

But still— to be a balloonist! To soar 
and to sing! Above all, to share the 
chorused flock-lore that united them 
all, from the tiniest pod to the leaky 
old, slow giants that even the ha’aye’i 
scorned. Charlie’s song was trium- 
phant. and all the flock around him 

GALAXY 




stopped their greedy gobbling to join 
in the harmony. 

Still his eye-patches rotated 
watchfully toward the mesa; but there 
was no sign of the airplane or of the 
New Friend he had been told would 
rise from the spot. And they were 
drifting with the cloud, away from 
the Camp of the Big Sun. 

Many of the flock were sated, 
softly singing their private 
courtesy-songs of thanksgiving. They 
were a Fine flock though, Charlie ad- 
mitted, very few in number. 

He sang to them, “Stop feeding, 
stop feeding! We must go!” 

“Go where, go where?” grumbled 
a chorus of the slower and the hun- 
grier ones, and an individual song 
sounded above the choir: 

Faintly: “I must eat more. 1 die.” 
That was the old female, Blue-Rose 
Glow. Her bag had been seared when 
half the flock had been set aflame. 

“Not now, not now, “sang Charlie 
commandingly. “Follow!” And he 
sang the new song, the duty song he 
had learned from his friend Danny 
Dalehouse. It was no longer enough 
to float and sing and replenish hy- 
drogen and breed. Not any more. 
Station must be kept and the mesa 
observed. And the Camp of the Big 
Sun must be avoided, and the ha’aye’i 
guarded against and the swarm kept 
together; so many imperatives, both 
the new and the old! And so he led 
them through their slow, bobbing 
dance with the winds. 

For a long time he led them , watch- 
ing ceaselessly as he had promised. 
Even so, it was not he who first saw 
the thing. From far behind, old 
Blue-Rose Glow sang feebly, “There 
is a new Sky-Danger.” 

“Catch up, catch up!” he com- 

JEM 



manded. “You sing poorly.” It was 
not sung in unkindness but only be- 
cause it was true. 

“Ileak,” she apologized. “Never- 
theless it is there, almost in reach of 
the Earth-Dangers, far away.” 

He rotated his eye-patches and 
rose to another air-current. There it 
was. “1 see the Sky-Danger,” he 
sang, and the rest of the flock con- 
firmed. It was not ha’aye’i. It was 
the mechanical thing from the camp 
of the Middle Sun, as he had been 
told. In it, he knew, was the Other 
Friend who had sometimes soared 
with Danny Dalehouse, and also the 
New Friend he had not yet seen. 

It was all as said by Danny Dale- 
house. The biplane slunk in at treetop 
level and set down on the dry mesa, 
a dozen kilometers upwind of the 
Greasy camp. While the swarm 
watched, Kappelyushnikov and a fe- 
male person emerged and began to 
fill a net of balloons out of tiny tanks. 

When the New Friend’s cluster 
began to swell and she rose gently 
from the ground, the aircraft took off 
again, turned quickly and slipped 
back down the slope toward the dis- 
tant ocean-lake. The New Friend 
rose into the prevailing poleward 
wind and drifted directly toward the 
Camp of the Big Sun. 

Charlie dared come no closer, but 
he saw her venting gas as she ap- 
proached the camp. She tumbled into 
the underbrush somewhere nearby; 
and it was all as it had been foretold. 

“The thing is done,” Charlie car- 
oled triumphantly. 

“And what now?” asked the 
swarm, milling around him, staring 
after the New Friend as she fell. 

“I will ask the air,” he sang. His 
little insect-legs fumbled at the switch 

107 




of the hard, shiny speaker-to-the-air 
Danny Dalehouse had given him. He 
sang a questioning greeting to his 
friend. 

He tried twice, listening between 
times as Dalehouse had taught them. 
There was no answer, only an un- 
pleasant hissing song of static and 
distant storms. 

“We must go near the Camp of the 
Middle Sun,” he announced. “The 
speaker-to-the-air cannot sing so 
far.” His skilled eyes read the signs 
of the clouds and the fern-tops far 
below, seeking the currents he wanted. 
It was too bad that Dalehouse could 
so seldom soar with the flock these 
days, because of the hated ha’aye’i 
of his own kind, but Charlie knew 
that once they were in line of sight, 
the speaker-to-the-air would bring 
his song. 

“Follow!" he sang. He swarmed 
the flock around him. They dropped, 
all fourteen of them, through a fast- 
moving layer of stratus cloud, into 
the backflow near the surface. 

When they emerged, old Blue-Rose 
Glow was gone, the leaks in her bag 
finally too great to allow her to re- 
main airborne. So was the young fe- 
male called Shrill-Squeal, nowhere 
in sight, even her song no longer au- 
dible. 

By the time they approached the 
Camp of the Middle Sun and Charlie 
began to sing through the radio to 
Dalehouse, there were only twelve 
left in the flock. 

★ 

Marge Menninger looked up as 
Kappelyushnikov came in from the 
orderly room, closing the flap to her 
private office behind him. “Any 

108 



word?” she asked. 

“Danny has had radio from gas- 
bag, yes. Your friend was seen to 
descend near Greasies, all in order.” 
“How long ago?” 

“With gasbags, who can say? Per- 
haps some hours. Not long after I 
departed spy-drop scene.” 

“All right. Thanks.” After he left. 
Marge started to call the communi- 
cations tent, then decided against it. 
If the Greasies radioed that they had 
rescued Tinka, blown helplessly off 
course, the communications clerk 
would let her know. And he hadn’t. 
So the Greasies were playing it covert 
and slick, and what was Tinka up 
against in their camp? Had they fig- 
ured out that she really wasn’t there 
by accident? Could she-? Were they-? 
Wasn’t it-? Questions multiplied 
themselves in Margie’s mind end- 
lessly, and there was no straightfor- 
ward way of getting answers. You 
could get your ass lost in those 
swamps of contingencies and subjec- 
tives. 

That was not the way Marge Men- 
ninger ran her life. She made a de- 
cision. In one hour exactly she would 
have the comm clerk radio a query 
to the Greasies, and until then she 
would put it out of her mind; 

Meanwhile, lunch was fifty min- 
utes away and what to use that time 
for? 

The fifteen notes she had made to 
herself on this morning’s calendar 
had all been checked off. All current 
projects were on schedule, or close 
enough. Everyone had been assigned 
tasks. The first hectare of wheat was 
in the ground, sixteen different strains 
competing to see which would thrive 
best. The perimeter defenses were in 
order. Three turrets still sat on the 

GALAXY 





beach, ready to be put where needed 
when she wanted to expand the per- 
imeter, or establish another post. She 
looked at the 1:1 000 map, two meters 
long and a meter high, that covered 
almost all of one wall of her office. 
That was something! It showed every 
feature within a kilometer of where 
she sat-seven creeks or rivers, a 
dozen hills, two capes, several bays. 
Grid references were not enough, 
they needed names. What better way 
to name them than to let individual 
members of the camp pick them? She 
would organize a drawing; each win- 
ner could name something, and that 
would give them something to do. 
She called in her temporary orderly 
and dictated a short memo for the 
bulletin board. “Check it with the 
communications section,” she fin- 
ished. “Make sure we list all the fea- 
tures worth naming.” 

“Yes’m. Colonel? Sergeant Sweg- 
gert wants to see you. Says it’s not 
urgent.” 

Margie wrote Sweggert on her cal- 
endar. “I’ll let you know.” Then she 
put Sweggert out of her mind, too. 
She had not yet decided what to do 
about Sweggert. She had a wide va- 

JEM 



riety of options, from laughing it off 
to court-martialing him for rape. 
Which she elected would depend a 
lot on how Sweggert conducted him- 
self. So far he had had the smarts to 
keep a low profile. 

On the other hand, she thought, 
her authority to court-martial any- 
body for anything rested on the mil- 
itary chain of command, which 
extended up from her through the 
tachtran link to higher authority on 
Earth. And who was to say how long 
Earth would give a shit about backing 
her up? Or about whether the colony 
lived or died? The news from home 
was bad, so bad that she had not 
passed all of it on to the camp. The 
tachtran message acknowledging her 
shopping list had advised that it was 
touch and go whether she would get 
everything she had asked for. Re- 
quests for further supplies after that 
shipment were, quote, to be evalu- 
ated in terms of conditions at the time 
of receipt of requisition, unquote. 

It was what she had expected. But 
it was sobering. 

On her pad for the afternoon she 
made two notes: 

Medic-bank okay? 

Food-6 mos. estimate firm? Stretch 
I yr w rationing? 

It was a damn nuisance that the 
agronomists all seemed to be Cana- 
dian! Margie needed some smart and 
private help-smart, because how they 
managed their crops was likely to be 
life and death for the colony, sensi- 
tive because she didn’t want the col- 
ony to know that just yet. If she got 
everything on her shopping list, she 
would have plenty of seed stock. But 
who knew whether she had the ones 
that would grow best? 

-Dismiss that thought, too. 



109 



Forty minutes left. 

She unlocked the private drawer 
of her desk and lit a joint. Assume 
the shopping list all gets delivered. 
There’s enough on it for pretty fair 
margin against most kinds of disas- 
ters, she thought, and there was no 
sense worrying until she had to. 

The requisition list included a good 
chunk of personal things for Margie 
herself: clothes, cosmetics, micro- 
fiche sewing patterns. With the pat- 
terns, there would be enough variety 
in styles to suit everyone in the camp, 
male or female, for a good long time, 
assuming they found some way of 
producing fabrics to make the pat- 
terns on. It would be nice to have 
some pretty clothes. She was already 
beginning to feel the absence of Sak- 
owitz and Marks and Sparks, Sears 
and Two Guys. One day, maybe, she 
thought, drawing a deep hit. Not Sak- 
owitz, no. But maybe a few bou- 
tiques. Maybe some of the people in 
the camp had sewing or tailoring 
skills, and maybe it was about time 
she started locating them. She flipped 
the calendar ahead a few pages and 
made a note on a virgin page. That 
Bulgarian prunt was the kind of 
girly— girl who would like to sew, 
possibly even as well as Margie did 
herself; she had been pretty morose 
after her long walk in the country- 
side, but she did her work and might 
need something to occupy her mind. 
It didn’t seem that she wanted a man 
for that purpose, at least she had thor- 
oughly discouraged Guy Tree and 
Cappy and Sweggert- 

Sweggert. 

“Jack, send the sergeant in,” she 
called. 

“Yes’m. He’s gone back to the 
perimeter, but I’ll get him.” 

GO 



As she leaned back, marshalling 
her thoughts about Sweggert, the 
handset buzzed and it was the com- 
munications clerk. “Colonel? 1 was 
just talking to the Greasies about Cor- 
poral Pellatinka.” 

“I didn’t tell you to ask them.” 
“No’m. But I kept sending on her 
frequency, like you ordered, and their 
radioman cut in to ask if we had lost 
her. So 1 said she didn’t answer. So 
they said they’d send out a party to 
look for her.” 

Margie sat back and took a 
thoughtful drag on the cigarette. Ac- 
cording to the balloonists, there was 
no way the Greasies couldn’t have 
seen her come down. So now they 
were overtly lying. 

* 

Sergeant Sweggert shared a num- 
ber of traits with Marge Menninger. 
One of them was that he was willing 
to go to a lot of trouble to get things 
right, and then if he saw a chance for 
improvement, he was willing to do 
whatever it took to make them Tight- 
er. When he perceived that moving 
the Number Three machine-gun em- 
placement two meters toward the lake 
would improve the field of fire, he 
moved it. Or his squad did. The fact 
that it took five hours of backbreak- 
ing work did not affect his decision. 
He lent a hand to put the HMG on 
its tripod and swung it to check the 
field. “Fucking lousy,” he told the 
crew, “but we’ll leave it for now. 
Get that ammo restowed.” 

He crouched behind the gun, swiv- 
eling it through full traverse. It was 
an act that gave him pleasure. As far 
as the shore of the lake on the extreme 
left and the beginning of the fern for- 

GALAXY 




est on the right, there was no way 
than any sizeable creature could ap- 
proach without being a clear target 
for the gunner. The claymores and 
smoke bombs were emplaced and 
fused, and his command— post det- 
onating radio was keyed to each of 
them. The floodlights were in posi- 
tion, with quadruple redundancy. At 
any given moment only a quarter of 
them were lit, searching the entire 
area around the perimeter. Every 
hour that quarter went off, and the 
next quarter came on, so that any 
burned-out bulbs or wiring deficien- 
cies would distribute themselves 
equally and could be fixed in the 
down time. In actual combat, of 
course, they would all be on. Most 
would be shot out, but not in time to 
let anyone cross that perimeter. Not 
alive. 

Although, he admitted to himself 
as he climbed out of the dome, the 
chances that anyone would try a 
straightforward frontal attack were 
very small. Maybe an attack from the 
sky. Maybe by long-range rocket 
fire. Maybe not at all. This whole 
fucking shootup was crazy, if you 
asked Sergeant Sweggert. What the 
fuck was there to fight about in this 
asshole place, without a bar or a town 
or even for God’s sake a decent tree 
or field? If you had asked him, that 
was what he would have said, in total 
sincerity, but it would not have 
stopped him from fighting for it. 

The balloonists were still hanging 
around. Sweggert neither looked at 
them directly nor changed expres- 
sion; it was none of the squad’s busi- 
ness what he was thinking. But inside 
he was swearing. The colonel wouldn't 
have kept him waiting like this a 
w eek ago. If she was going to shaft 

JEM 



him, what was she waiting 
for? . “Sarge.” He looked up. 
“They’re calling you from the or- 
derly room.” He turned idly, and saw 
the corporal waving. 

“Aggie, take over,” he ordered. 
“If I come back and that ammo isn’t 
restowed, it’s all your asses.” 

He strolled back toward the HQ 
tent and walked in. Marge Menninger 
was eating out of a messkit, reading 
from a small-screen viewer. She 
didn’t look up. “The perimeter’s 
looking good, Sweggert,” she said. 
“Got that machine-gun back in 
place?” 

“Yes’m. Colonel? There’s a bunch 
of gasbags around, and that one we 
been using is about used up. We’ll 
be relieved in a couple of minutes. 
Can we get a fix from the new ones?’ ’ 

She put down her spoon and looked 
at him. After a moment, she said, 
“Just who do you mean by 'we,’ sol- 
dier?” 

“Oh, no, ma’am!” Jesus, she was 
touchy! He knew he was close to 
trouble. “1 don’t mean nothing, 
ma’am, just that the detail’s been 
working hard and they need a little 
break. We’ll-they’ll come out of it 
in an hour, and the relief’ll be there 
anyway.” 

She studied him for a moment. 
“That’s four-oh, Sweggert, but only 
half the detail. Keep the rest sober.” 

“Sure thing. Colonel. Thank you. 
Colonel.” He got out of there as fast 
as he could. Shit, he should’ve been 
more careful, knowing how she felt 
and all. Not that she was all wrong. 
If he hadn’t been drunk, he wouldn’t 
have done it. But, shit! It was worth 
it. Remembering the way she had 
been, with a skin full of the balloonist 
mist, his groin grew heavy. 



Ill 




When he got back to the detail, he 
looked at them with some disap- 
proval. Corporal Kirstianides was 
skinny and had sideburns all down 
her cheeks, but she was the best he 
had to pick from. “Aggie, take Pe- 
terson and four others, you’re on duty 
till the relief shows up. Kris, you and 
the rest come along with me. We’re 
gonna take ourselves a jizzum break. 
Anybody don’t want to come, switch 
with somebody don’t want to stay. 
Let’s move it.” 

The balloonists were out over the 
ocean-lake now, half a kilometer 
away and low. Sweggert marched his 
dozen troops across the camp to the 
empty tents at the end of the company 
street; he would do it in the open if 
he had to, but damned if he wouldn’t 
take a little privacy when he could 
get it. The tethered balloonist, farther 
than ever from recuperating, had 
been moved there days since, along 
with the strobe light. 

Sweggert stopped, swearing. Nan 
Dimitrova and Dalehouse were talk- 
ing to the balloonist, and only a few 
meters away the Russian pilot, Kap- 
pelyushnikov, was complaining about 
something to Colonel Tree. Privacy, 
shit. But it didn’t matter; he had 
Colonel Menninger’s permission, and 
she was the one who counted. He 
retrieved the strobe and pointed it to- 
ward the hovering swarm. 

Predictably, Dalehouse butted in. 
“What do you think you’re doing, 
Sweggert?” 

Sweggert took time to aim the 
strobe and flash it to bring them in 
before he answered. “Gonna have a 
little fun. The colonel said it was 
okay.” 

“Hell she did! Anyway-” 

“Anyway,” Sweggert interrupted. 



“why don’t you go check with her 
if you don’t believe me? Would you 
move a little, sir? You’re getting be- 
tween them and the light.” 

Ana Dimitrova laid her hand on 
Dalehouse’s arm to keep him from 
replying. “It is not fun for the bal- 
loonists, Sergeant Sweggert. To ex- 
perience sexual climax is very painful 
and debilitating. As you can see, this 
one is seriously affected. It may 
die.” 

“What a way to go, hey, Ana?” 
Sweggert grinned. “Take it up with 
the colonel-hey, Dalehouse! What 
are you doing?” 

Dalehouse had switched on his ra- 
dio and was singing softly into it. 
Colonel Tree, beginning to pay at- 
tention, walked toward them, and 
Sweggert turned to him. “Colonel! 
We have Colonel Menninger’s per- 
mission to get the loonies in for a fix, 
and this guy’s telling them to screw 
off!” 

Tree stopped, with his hands clasped 
behind his back, and nodded gravely. 
“A dilemma,” he said in his soft, 
child’s voice. “It will be quite inter- 
esting to see what they do.” 

What they were doing was spread- 
ing themselves all over the sky, some 
dropping lower to catch the onshore 
breeze, others hesitating. They were 
singing loudly and discordantly, and 
the sounds came distantly from the 
sky and tinnily from the radio in 
Dalehouse’s hand. Sweggert stood 
rock-still, controlling the rage that 
was building up in him. Fucking 
Cong! When you had the CO’s per- 
mission, that was all you were sup- 
posed to need! Why wouldn’t Tree 
back him up! “Gimme that,” he 
growled, reaching out for Dale- 
house’s radio. 



112 



GALAXY 




But Dalehouse’s expression had 
changed. “Hold it,” he snapped, and 
sang a quick phrase into the radio. 
The answer came back as a cascade 
of musical phrases; Dalehouse looked 
startled and Ana Dimitrova gasped, 
her hand to her lips. “Tree,” he said, 
“according to Charlie, there’s some 
Krinpit down the beach, and they’re 
eating a couple of people.” 

“But Krinpit do not eat human 
beings,” objected Colonel Tree, and 
Sweggert chimed in: 

“There’s nobody down there. No- 
body’s gone through the perimeter all 
day.” 

Dalehouse repeated his- question 
into the radio and shrugged. “That’s 
what he says. He could be wrong 
about the eating part, I guess-he 
doesn’t have a very clear concept of 
killing, except to eat.” 

Sweggert put down the strobe. 
“We better tell the colonel,” he said. 

Colonel Tree said, “That’s cor- 
rect. You do so, Dalehouse. Ser- 
geant, form your squad on the beach 
in thirty seconds, full combat gear. 
We’re going to see what’s happen- 
ing.” 

★ 

Half an hour later Marge Mennin- 
ger herself, with thirty armed grunts 
behind her, met the first party coming 
back along the beach. There were no 
casualties, or at least none from the 
Food Bloc, but they were carrying 
two people. One was in a sort of sling 
made from two jackets knotted to- 
gether, the other on Sergeant Sweg- 
gert’s shoulder, fireman-carry. They 
were both dead. When Sweggert put 
his burden down, it was obvious why 
he had been easy to cany. Both legs 

JEM 



were missing, and so was part of his 
head. 

The other body was less mutilated, 
so that Marge Menninger recognized 
her at once. 

It was Tinka. 

Marge stood numbly while Sweg- 
gert made his report. No Krinpit in 
sight; they had got away, so far that 
they couldn’t even be heard. Both 
people were dead when they got 
there, but recently; the bodies were 
still warm. For that matter, they were 
still warm now. And the man had had 
a packet in a waterproof wrapping 
inside his shirt. Margie accepted it 
and tore it open. Microfiches-scores 
of them. The man’s ID card, which 
showed that he was the Indonesian 
Tinka had gone to contact. A pair of 
child-sized spectacles-clear glass, not 
optically ground; why? For that mat- 
ter, how? Had they been caught as 
spies, and then somehow escaped? 
And how had they got the long dis- 
tance from the Greasy camp to the 
beach where they died? 

By the time they got back to the 
base, she had an answer to at least 
part of the question, because Dale- 
house reported the balloonists had 
spotted something that looked like 
the remains of a deflated rubber boat, 
farther down the beach. She swung 
the tiny glasses from their elastic 
band as she listened, nodding, taking 
in all of it as information to process, 
not quite ready to take in the infor- 
mation of Tinka’s death as a pain to 
feel. 

She looked down at the glasses. 
They were now almost opaque. 

“That’s interesting,” she said, in 
a voice that was very nearly normal. 

They must be photo-sensitive glass. 
Like indoor-outdoor sunglasses.” 

113 




She glanced up at the sullen red coal 
of Rung overhead, “Only what in the 
world would anybody want with 
them on Jem?” 

XVII 

Six kilometers down the shoreline 
from where he had slain the Poison 
Ghosts, Sham-igon paused in his 
flight to scratch out a shallow pit un- 
der a bluff. He needed to hide, be- 
cause he needed to rest. 

Digging was always dangerous for 
a Krinpit because of the Ghosts Be- 
low. But here it was unlikely they 
would be near. Too close to the 
water; they did not like to risk their 
tunnels flooding. And the Many-Tree 
on the bluff above him was a good 
sign. The roots of the Many-Tree 
were distasteful to them. 

As he settled himself in, Sham-igon 
wondered briefly what had become 
of his co-belligerent, the Poison 
Ghost Dulla, He did not feel concern, 
as one might for a fellow being. He 
did not think of Dulla in that way. 
Dulla was a weapon, a tool, without 
“being”ness. After they had slain the 
Poison Ghosts Dulla called “Greas- 
ies” they had both fled, and of course 
Dulla had fled faster and farther. 
Sham-igon did not think of that as 
a betrayal. If he had been the nimble 
one and Dulla the slow-moving, he 
would certainly have done the same. 
Dulla’s utility as a tool lay in his 
speed, and in the way he was able to 
speak words to other Poison Ghosts 
that caused them to hesitate, to be 
uncertain, while Sham-igon had time 
to come in upon them and kill. It was 
so very easy to kill Poison Ghosts! 
A. few slashes, a blow with the 
club-claw, it took no more than that. 

114 



Sometimes they had weapons, and 
Sham-igon had learned to respect 
some of those weapons. But the two 
on the beach had had so little, a 
bright-sounding popgun whose little 
bullets bounced off his shell, a thing 
that squirted some sort of foul, sting- 
ing smell at him that made him feel 
queer and unpleasant for a moment, 
but did not slow him in the kill. Such 
as they he could kill with or without 
his tool, the Poison Ghost Dulla. 

He switched his carapace back and 
forth to wedge himself deeper in his 
pit and rested, his hearing receptors 
watchful toward the water, his feelers 
drilled deep into the soil to listen for 
vibrations from any approaching 
Ghosts Below. It was they he feared, 
more than any danger from the water 
or the beach. 

Of course, in normal circumstan- 
ces an adult Krinpit in shell was a 
match for a dozen of the Ghosts Be- 
low-as long as he could stay on the 
surface. Or at least in sound of it. In 
the open. Ghosts Below seemed deaf, 
running almost at random. But these 
were not normal circumstances. 
Sham-igon was not only weary, he 
felt sick. He felt irritable, tense, 
bloated-ready, he would have said 
to his he-wife (but Cheee-pruit was 
months dead, his carapace dry), to 
stridulate and jump out of his shell. 
But it was not the right time for that. 
He was not due for many months yet, 
so it couldn’t be normal pre-nioult 
tension. 

Abruptly his sphincter loosened. 
He regurgitated everything he had 
eaten in a great flood, meat of deaf- 
worm, scraps of chitin of crabrat, 
half-digested fruits and fungi and 
leaves. 

Vomiting left him weak but calm. 

GALAXY 




After resting for a moment, he cov- 
ered the mess over, and then me- 
thodically began to clean his shell. 
No doubt the Poison Ghosts were tak- 
ing revenge for being killed on the 
beach. It had to be their scraps of 
flesh still caught in Sham-igon’s che- 
lae that were making him ill. That-and 
the inner sickness that had claimed 
him when the Poison Ghosts first 
came to his city, and began the re- 
morseless chain of circumstance that 
had taken all joy from his life. 

Krinpit did not cry. They had no 
tear-ducts; they had no eyes to have 
tear-ducts in. They did have the 
emotion of sorrow, and no 
culture-driven tabus against express- 
ing it in their own way. That way was 
stillness. A quiet Krinpit-or as close 
to quiet as a Krinpit could get-was 
a weeping Krinpit. 

For most of an hour, once he had 
polished the last dried particle of 
alien blood off his tympanum. 
Sham-igon was nearly soundless; a 
rasp of claw against carapace, an oc- 
casional despairing moan, little else. 

Unbidden, sounds of happier times 
echoed in his mind. He heard 
Cheee-pruitt again, and the little fe- 
male-what was her name?-whom 
they had impregnated, and who bore 
their young. She had been a dulcet 
creature. She had had almost a per- 
sonality of her own, along with the 
bittersweet appeal of any mated fe- 
male, her young growing and eating 
inside her until too much was de- 
stroyed and she died. The brood pol- 
ished her carapace clean and emerged 
to the loud, exciting world of their 
wife-father’s back. 

But everything was changed now. 

It was all the fault of the Poison 
Ghosts! Ever since the first of them 

JEM 



had arrived and Cheee-pruitt, dear, 
lost Cheee-pruitt, had had the un- 
wisdom to try to eat it, Sham-igon’s 
world had fallen apart. Not just 
Cheee-pruitt, all of it. The Krinpit 
he had mobilized against the Poison 
Ghosts Dulla called Greasies had 
been punished severely. His own vil- 
lage-mates had been attacked from 
the air in reprisal, and so many of 
them dead. And how many had he 
succeeded in killing in return? A few. 
Hardly any. The two on the beach, 
the handful that he and Dulla had sur- 
prised at the outpost-not enough! 
And all of Dulia’s plans had come to 
little: the nearest Krinpit village to 
the Fats had wavered and wobbled, 
promised to join in an attack and 
withdrawn the promise; and mean- 
while all he and Dulla could do was 
skulk around like crabrats, looking 
for strays to attack and finding none. 
Until the two came out of their sink- 
ing vessel- 

There was a sound from the water. 

Sham-igon froze. -It was not pos- 
sible for him to be wholly silent while 
he breathed at all, but he did his best. 

He listened out of his shallow 
cave, and heard a small, almost in- 
audible blurred echo from the water. 
A coracle. And in it what seemed to 
be a Poison Ghost. 

Another to kill? It was approach- 
ing. Sham-igon thrust himself out of 
the cave and reared up to defend him- 
self; and then he heard his own name 
shouted across the beach: 
“Sham-igon!” And then those bar- 
barous sounds that were the name of 
his mistrusted ally, or his traced foe: 
“OCK-med dul-LAH.” 

He scuttled across the sand, half 
to greet Dulla, half ready to kill, as 
Dulla yelled and pleaded, “Hurry! 

115 




The Fats will be searching this whole 
coast, we must get out!” 

★ 

With Sham-igon aboard, the cor- 
acle rode very low in the water. It 
could not easily sink. Its cellular shell 
entrapped too much air for that. But 
it could swamp. 

Crossing Broad Water it often did, 
and then both of them splashed and 
bailed and kept a watchful eye or ear 
for Ghosts Above until they could get 
under weigh again. The little sail 
helped them when the wind blew fair; 
but there was no keel. When the wind 
shifted, the sail had to come down 
and they had to paddle. It seemed to 
take forever; and Sham-igon felt in- 
creasingly ill; and at every stroke or 
splash the grim recriminations con- 
tinued: 

“But for you, my he-wife would 
still be alive.” 

“You are foolish, Sham-igon. He 
tried to kill us, it is not our fault he 
died of it.” 

“And my village was attacked, 
and another village destroyed en- 
tirely, and I myself am ill.” 

“Speak of something else, 
Sham-igon. Speak of the promises 
your Krinpit made to join in the attack 
on the Fats, and how they broke 
them.” 

“I will speak of my sorrow and my 
anger, Ahmed Dulla.” 

“Then speak also of mine! We too 
have suffered in fighting with you 
against the common enemy.” 

“Suffered.” 

“Yes, suffered! Before my radio 
was destroyed-by you, Sham-igon, 
by your clumsiness !-I could hear no 
voice from my camp. They may be 

116 



dead, all of them!” 

“How many, Ahmed Dulla?” 

“A dozen or more!” 

“A dozen or more of you have then 
died. Of us, how many? Of persons, 
two hundred. Of females, forty. Of 
backlings and infants-” 

But it was not until they had 
crossed Broad Water and Sharn-igon 
heard the silence from his city that 
he perceived the immensity of the 
tragedy. There was no originated 
sound! There were only echoes, and 
what echoes! 

Always before, in crossing Broad 
Water, the city had presented a bus- 
tling, beautiful sound. Not this time. 
He heard nothing. Nothing! No drone 
of immature males at the waterfront, 
shredding the fish catch. No songs 
from the mold-eaters on the Great 
White Way. No hammering of stakes 
to build new palisades on the made 
land on the point. He heard the echo 
of his own sounds faintly returning 
to him, and recognized the shadowy 
outline of the mooring rocks, a few 
sheds, one or two boats, some struc- 
tures half destroyed, a litter of empty 
carapaces. Nothing else. 

The city was dead. 

The Poison Ghost, Dulla, chat- 
tered worriedly to him, and 
Sharn-igon made out the words: 
“Another attack! The place is empty. 
The Greasies must have come back 
to finish the job.” 

He could not reply. Stillness over- 
came him, a great, mourning silence 
so deep that even the Poison Ghost 
turned toward him in wonder. “Are 
you ill? What is happening?” 

With great effort Sharn-igon 
scratched the words out on his tym- 
panum. “You have killed my city 
and all my back-jnates.” 



JEM 




“We? Certainly not! It could not 
have been the People’s Republics, we 
have not the strength any more. It 
must have been the Greasies.” 
“Against whom you vowed to pro- 
tect us!” roared Sham-igon. He rose 
on hind legs to tower over Dulla, and 
the Poison Ghost cringed in fear. But 
Sham-igon did not attack. He threw 
himself forward, out of the coracle, 
with a broad splat that sent the waves 
dancing. The water was shallow here. 
Sham-igon managed to keep some 
of his hind feet on the oozy bottom, 
while enough of his breathing pores 
were above the surface to keep him 
from drowning. He charged up the 
shoreline, scattering the littered water 
in a V of foam. 

The tragedy made him still again, 
at every step and at each fresh echo. 
Dead! All dead. The streets empty, 
except for abandoned carapaces, al- 
ready dry. The shops untended. The 
homes deserted. Not a living male, 
not a female, not even any scram- 
bling, chittering young. 

Dulla waded through the stink of 
dead and floating marine animals, 
towing the coracle and staring about 
it. “What a horror!” he exclaimed. 
“We are brothers now more than 
ever, Sham-igon.” 

“All of my brothers are dead.” 
“What? Well, yes. But we must 
be as brothers, to take revenge! We 
must be allied against the Greasies 
and the Fats.” 

Sharn-igon reared up, trapping 
him against the wall of a mined shed. 
“I now need new allies, Ahmed 
Dulla,” he ground out, falling upon 
him. In the last moment Dulla saw 
what was to happen and tried to es- 
cape. But it was too late; his quick- 
ness was not enough when he dodged 



from the snatching claws only to take 
the full force of the murderous club 
of chitin that stove his head in. 

When he was quite sure Dulla was 
dead, Sham-igon staggered away, 
blundering through the dried shells 
that had once been friends, to rest 
creakily against the wall of a shop he 
had once known. 

He took little satisfaction in the 
death of one more Poison Ghost. He 
did not even any longer mourn for 
the death of his city. A nearer pain 
touched him. His joints were aching, 
his body felt bloated, his carapace 
seemed to be sundering at the seams. 
It was not his time. But there was no 
doubt about it. Alone in the open 
tomb that had once been his home, 
with no one to care for him while he 
was helpless, he was beginning to 
moult. 

XVIII 

Oh one-thirty hours. Major San- 
tangelo, along with the pilot-engineer 
who had brought in the third ship. 
“Some good news, Margie. There’s 
a coal outcropping in the Bad Hills, 
two kilometers up. Plus we can bum 
wood and biomass, and Richy here 
says we can make a steam boiler with 
plates from one of the landing craft. 
If your turbine arrives, that means we 
can drive the generator up to full ca- 
pacity, fifty kilowatts, without using 
up our fuel reserves.” 

“When?” 

Santangelo looked at the engineer. 
“Ten days? Call it two weeks.” 
“Call it one week,” Margie 
snapped. “What about alcohol?” 
“Well, Morrissey’s got a kind of 
a yeast-something like a yeast -an- 
yway, he’s getting fermentation. 

117 



GALAXY 




Should be putting the first batch 
through the solar still tomorrow. You 
can probably smell it.” 

“Saint, I can taste it. I need that 
alcohol to stretch out the airplane 
fuel!” 

“I’ll goose him along,” Santan- 
gelo promised. 

“Do it,” said Margie. When they 
were gone, she picked up the handset 
and called the radio shack. “Any 
ETA yet?” 

“No, ma’am. They're still in orbit, 
figuring a minimum-energy de- 
scent.” She hung up. At least the 
resupply ship was in orbit around 
Jem, not light-years away. But that 
last little step was a killer. The cap- 
tain had radioed that his maneuvering 
reserve was low and he was waiting 
for the most favorable approach. That 
might be days! Worse than that. If 
the Cape had launched them without 
plenty of reserve, that meant things 
were seriously wrong at the Cape. 
Even wronger than the coded tach- 
trans from Earth had indicated, and 
that was wrong enough. 

She looked at her watch. Oh one 
forty-five. “Send in Dr. Arkash- 
vili,” she called, and the medic came 
in on cue, bearing a cup of steaming 
black coffee. 

“Medical supplies, Margie. But a 
little more sleep would do you more 
good.” 

Marge sniffed the aluminum cup 
rapturously and took a scalding sip. 
“I wish they’d land,” she said fret- 
fully. Among the goodies on her 
shopping list were coffee beans, or 
seeds, or whatever it took to try to 
grow coffee for themselves. Other- 
wise the next couple of years, any- 
way, might be coffee-free. Of course, 
the Greasies probably had some 

118 



growing already, to make that vile 
stuff they handed out in the little brass 
pots, but they weren’t likely to give 
any away. They weren’t giving an- 
ything away now, not even infor- 
mation over the radio; and the Peeps 
simply were not answering at all. 

At least the camp was gratifyingly 
healthy, according to the medic’s re- 
port. The anti-allergens were stand- 
ing up well, and there was nothing 
else in the Jemman environment to 
make a human being sick. A few 
headaches, probably from the climate 
and from the switch to a 24-hour day; 
some dentistry; an appendix that 
needed watching; a request for a vas- 
ectomy- “No,” said Margie sharply. 
“Don’t do any vasectomies. Or la- 
paroscopies, either.” 

The doctor looked thoughtful. 
“You’re going to have some 
knocked-up personnel.” 

“You’re supposed to be able to 
handle that, right? Anyway, give 
them the pill, diaphragms, con- 
doms-anything reversible or tempo- 
rary. I get along fine with an IUD, 
and 1 can always take it out if I want 
to have a baby.” 

“Which you might?” 

“Which all of us females may 
damn well have to, Cheech. That’s 
an order: Everybody capable of 
breeding stays capable. How’s the 
baby bank?” 

“Coming along fine. I’ve got 
twenty-eight ova in cryonic hold, and 
about a hundred sperm samples.” 
“Good, Cheech, but not good 
enough. I want a hundred per cent 
compliance with that. If anything 
happens to anybody, I don’t want his 
genes lost. Or hers. They don’t take 
up much space, do they? Then I want, 
let’s say, four samples from each, 



GALAXY 




and-what are you grinning about?" 

The medic said, “Well, it’s just 
that a couple of the ova turned out 
to be pre-fertilized. They’re fine. 
They’ll keep in the deep-freeze in- 
definitely, but whenever you want 
them re-implanted, we won’t have 
to go to the bother of getting them 
started.” 

“Hum."’ Margie scratched 
thoughtfully. “I’m almost sorry you 
took the sample; we could start hav- 
ing kids any time now. Who were 
they? Common, Cheech, none of this 
medical confidentiality; I’m your 
commanding officer.” 

“Well, one was Ana Dimitrova.” 
“No shit! Whose kid?” 

“You can ask her if you want to. 
I didn’t.” 

Marge shook her head wonder- 
ingly. “1 would have guessed her 
about last,” she said. “And the other 
one? Now, wait a minute! It couldn’t 
be me! The IUD-” 

“The IUD doesn’t keep an ovum 
from getting fertilized, it only pre- 
vents it taking root and developing.” 
Margie sat back and stared at the 
doctor. “I’ll be damned,” she said. 

★ 

Nguyen Dao Tree was ten minutes 
late for his oh-two-hundred appoint- 
ment, and arrived sleepy-eyed and 
irritable. “This twenty-four-hour day 
of yours is not comfortable, Mar- 
gie,” he complained. 

“You’re not the one to bitch, Guy. 
I took the midnight-to-eight myself. 
If you’d spend your sleeping time 
sleeping instead of tomcatting around 
with every woman in the camp-” 
“As to that, Marjorie,” he said, 
“I much preferred when you and I 



slept on the same schedule.” 

“Yeah. Well. Maybe we’ll have 
to do something about that, Guy, but 
right now we’re late for inspection.” 
She swallowed the last of her coffee, 
now cold but still delicious, and led 
the way. Complaints aside, the 
three-shift day was working well. On 
the plus side, the perimeter was well 
guarded, the hectarage under culti- 
vation was growing by nearly two 
thousand square meters every day, 
the each-one-teach-one training 
schedule Santangelo had set up so 
that the skills of the community were 
shared among several persons (what 
if Chiche Arkashvili died? Or their 
one and only surviving agronomist?) 
was on track. On the minus, aerial 
surveillance showed large numbers 
of Krinpit roaming around the woods, 
coffee was not the only food item to 
be running low and the resupply ship 
still could not give a firm landing 
time. 

Margie allowed one hour of each 
day for her inspection, and she used 
every minute of it. No white-glove 
chickenshit. The inspection was rough 
and dirty; if everybody was doing 
their job and the jobs were being 
done, that was it. Her Bastogne 




JEM 



119 




grandfather had not cared if the 
troops were shaved, only if they 
could fight. And Margie had learned 
the skills of a fortress under siege. 

That was what they were. No one. 
had attacked the perimeter, not even 
a wandering Krinpit. But they were 
isolated, in a world of enemies. From 
spy satellites and balloonists, from 
the breaking of codes and from what 
little could be gleaned from their in- 
frequent radio contacts, above all 
from the contents of the Indonesian’s 
pouch, Margie had formed a pretty 
good idea of what the Greasies were 
up to. Or had been up to, a few weeks 
earlier. They had occupied the Peeps’ 
camp, they had requisitioned quan- 
tities and varieties of personnel and 
equipment that made her drool. Even 
her letter to Santa Claus (that might 
or might not be hanging in orbit, 
waiting to come down her chimney) 
had not been so greedy. They had 
subdued the local autochthones, ap- 
parently by killing off all the nearby 
Krinpit and shooting down any bal- 
loonist who came near. Their bor- 
rowers they seemed to have tamed. 
And were using them for minerals 
exploration, because it seemed the 
Greasies had perched themselves on 
a Kuwait of oil and a Scranton of 
other fossil fuels. They had devised 
an enzyme, or possibly it was a hor- 
mone-the information had been un- 
clear-which took Krinpit out of action 
as well as 2,4-D had dried up the 
jungles of Vietnam, by causing them 
to moult. They had acquired some- 
thing from their Creepies that let 
them make building materials out of 
dirt, as the burrowers themselves 
hardened the interior surfaces of their 
tunnels. They had- Christ, what had 
they not done! If only her father had 
120 



listened to her and given her the sup- 
port she demanded, how gladly and 
competently she could have done the 
same! 

Not that she had done badly. But 
for Marge Menninger there was no 
such thing as second best, and the 
Greasies at that moment controlled 
the entire planet. Barring the dozen 
hectares her colony sat on, it was all 
theirs. Their aircraft roamed it at will, 
so the spy satellites said. They had 
three separate colonies now, counting 
the one that had once belonged to the 
probably no longer surviving Peeps. 
And apart from the rare occasions 
when she dared send Kappelyushni- 
kov on a quick survey flight (what 
would she do if there were some 
unexplained “accident” to her one 
and only aircraft?), she was blind 
except for what the satellites and the 
few living balloonists could tell. She 
had even grounded Danny Dale- 
house. Not only because of the risk 
to him-but that was a reason in itself, 
she admitted privately; she did not 
want him killed— but because the elec- 
tricity that made his hydrogen was 
better used for floodlights, to protect 
the camp and make the crops grow. 
Also she had apprenticed him to the 
agronomist, along with Morrissey 
and the Bulgarian girl-wait a minute, 
she thought to herself; Dalehouse and 
Dimitrova? Maybe so. Probably not. 
They had been friendly, but not that 
friendly. But then who? 

For that matter, she thought, look- 
ing at Guy Tree as he chattered away 
about contingency plans in the event 
of a major Krinpit attack, who was 
the father of her own sort-of child? 
Dalehouse? Tree? That son of a bitch 
Sweggert, Nvith his cute little tricks? 
They were the most likely candidates, 

GALAXY 




but which? 

In other times, one part of Marge 
Menninger would have contemplated 
with sardonic amusement that other 
part of Marge Menninger which really, 
dammit!, wanted to know. At present 
she had no room for that sort of 
amusement in her mind. The thought 
of mentioning to Nguyen Tree that 
the two of them might be in the pro- 
cess of becoming somewhat delayed 
parents crossed her mind just long 
enough to dismiss it. It promised 
some good comedy, but it also prom- 
ised complications she did not want 
to handle. First things first. “Are 
there any archers in the camp?” she 
asked. 

Tree stopped in the middle of ex- 
plaining his proposals for arming a 
couple of canoes. “What?” 

“People who know how to shoot 
a bow and arrow, damn it. We must 
have some. I’d like to organize a con- 
test, part of the sports program.” 

“Very likely so, Marjorie. I don’t 
believe there are any bows and ar- 
rows, however.” 

“If they know how to shoot them, 
they know how to make them, don’t 
they? Or anyway it’ll be in the mi- 
crofiches. Get started on that, please, 
Guy. We’ll give prizes. Coffee, cig- 
arettes. I’ll donate a bottle of Scotch.” 
The thought that had crossed her 
mind as he spoke of how he planned 
to mount a light machine-gun in a 
canoe was that the supplies of am- 
munition for the guns would not last 
forever either, but she wasn’t ready 
to say that even to her second-in- 
command. 

Tree looked puzzled, but paused 
to make a note in his book. “It would 
be a useful skill for hunting, I sup- 
pose.” 



Margie nodded without replying. 
Hunting what? Every animal they had 
seen on the surface of the planet was 
well enough armored to laugh off any 
home-made bow-a conspicuous 
blunder on the part of evolution in 
this place, she was convinced. But 
she let it go. 

As they were inspecting the power 
plant, a messenger from the com- 
munications shack trotted up. “Ship’s 
on its way in, Colonel,” she re- 
ported, panting. “They’ve already 
retrofired. We ought to see them in 
a couple of minutes.” 

“Thank God,” said Margie. “Put 
it on the P. A. Guy, get twenty grunts 
for unloading. Tell Major Arkashvili 
to stand by in case they land rough.” 
They didn’t land rough. But they 
didn’t land right, either. The drogue 
chute deployed handsomely, the craft 
came swinging down on its cluster 
of three, they jettisoned on schedule 
and it came in on its rockets. But it 
never made it to the beach where the 
others had landed. It came in almost 
a kilometer short and dropped into 
the jungle and out of sight. 

(To be Continued) 




JEM 



121 



A Little Girl’s Spring 
Day in Moderan 



by David Bunch 



It was in rain-time springtime that 
Little Sister danced across the 
planned-greening yards, one of her 
tiny hands lumped into a fist as 
though she concealed great treasure. 
She stopped outside his bubble dom’s 
orange-screaming door that was 
marked with the flying FW in 
fresh-peas green, the alphabet’s 
winged sixth and twenty-third letters 
designating “formula worker.’’ 
“DADDY!” she shrieked in her 
“normal” voice that was often these 
days apt to be near-hysterical, “come 
see what came in the mail tube. TO- 
DAY! It’s here! I sent a thousand 
dollars for it. TWO WEEKS AGO. 
I ordered out of an old Learner’s 
Catalog! And now it says, “See 
Daddy or Mother. FOR HELP!” 
With the hand that was not a fist she 
waved; the waving contained a green 
sheet that had yellow and purple and 
pink and blue and red and orange 
writing on it in a kind of rainbow 
show, or in the Old 'Days it would 
have been so designated. Probably. 

He moved like a man stung by a 
sudden pang in the head; he lurched 

122 



and stared, still sitting in his formula 
worker’s hip-snug, strapped in. And 
he peered carefully and long out 
through the tube of his Outer Scan 
to make sure the voice was really that 
of Little Sister and not some Enemy 
come disguised. After a good scan- 
ning while and after a goodly number 
of voice-a-grams had been analyzed 
and declared authentic, without-doubt 
Little Sister, he thumbed the switch 
that would alert Control a thousand 
miles away that he wanted loose from 
his chair bands. After a while of au- 
thenticating and negotiating over for- 
mula worker’s long-corn. Control 
gave the go-ahead and he came loose 
from the metal straps of that place 
where he sat at work. 

Control windings unwinding, harsh 
restrainers metal-mumbling along the 
floor, free he lurched up at last. Tall 
and tottery he stood for a bit, a whit 
wild-headed and uncertain just for 
a while, for it had been more than a 
month now since he had been free of 
the bands. He shook his head to clear 
it and make peace with the strange 
height he was suddenly in and he 



GALAXY 





called on all the reserves of his pride 
as a vaunted FW to keep him now 
from the dark disgrace of suddenly 
tumbling down. His thoughts sloshed 
furiously in the metal brain pans and 
went back a long way as he sought 
to rearrange and pattern into sense his 
unaccustomed feeling at the voice 
that had just said, “Daddy,” and had 
also said, “See Daddy or Mother.” 
Was the chance worth it? Could he 
trust his analyses? Could he even 
trust the Outer Scan to accurately 
gather the impressions for the anal- 
yses? What if his eyes were just that 
nth part “on the blink” today for 
out-viewing, after all that close work 
in? But everything said yes, this 
really is Little Sister outside your 
door. And yes, he did want to believe 
them. But oh, the world is such a 
place of tricks now. What if it wasn’t 
Little Sister, but a walking doll bomb 
come made-up, disguised, a calamity 
device designed to blow him at a 
handshaker a hello, to high shrieks 
and all winds-and-skies and thus 
weaken Control by one Formula 
Worker less? Who would want to? 
Oh, anyone who was against Control 
would want to. And there are always 
those-OH YES !-t hose who would 
pick the Beautiful Precision to pieces 
and set the imprecision of choices 
loose in the world, in the name of 
Freedom. Boooo brrrrrrkkkkkk 
blaaahhh boooo. And he belonged 
to Control. He was Control ! and Con- 
trol was he! one and one and always 
one, bonded in inseparable union for 
greater for greater for greater for- It 
boggled; the metal brain pans died to 
a stop for an instant; he moved, not 
knowing why, on some older far-back 
Plan. He whistled the signal at his 
orange-screaming door; the door, 

SPRING DAY IN MODERAN 



never disobeying the signal, seemed 
eaten by the wall it slid into, and the 
proud flying FW was gone. He pressed 
his button for a voice. 

“Hello hello HELLO, Little LIT- 
TLE Sis-Sister.” Damn! after this 
long, talking was VERY hard. He 
stood as though frozen to the floor. 
He looked out and down at her from 
the exaggerated and very skinny 
height of his metaled feet and legs. 
Then he took five agonizingly slow 
and clanking steps toward his door. 
Exactly at the edge of his door he 
drew himself up. He planted himself 
in all his flying-FW dignity-drawn 
up and planted, yes! Next he did the 
“toeing of the line.” Exactly to the 
edge, but no more. No Formula 
Worker, except in the most extraor- 
dinary of circumstances (called in the 
jargon of Control an E.O.C.) ever 
recrossed the edge of his door. Once 
in was IN. It was all too fraught with 
BIG CHANCE. BIG DANGER, such 
leaving, and besides, where would 
they go? Out to meet a girl FC (For- 
mula Checker) in some mad rendez- 
vous of clanking hot metaled sex and 
randy sloshing brain pans crying 
LOVE? Ah no. The State (Control) 
needed them too badly; only an 
E.O.C. could break them out past 
their door. 

“A thousand-” he started to ex- 
plode, some older far-back set of 
values nudging him, and then he 
thought, why, this is Little Sister, and 
this is spring. Forgetting for a little 
the iron urgency of his formula, he 
said, pressing the right button for 
“general small talk with close rela- 
tive” on his voice box phfltiggee- 
phflaggee, “What have you there, 
Little Sister, what have you got?” 

She opened her fist-squeezed hand 

123 




to reveal two ancient seeds that 
looked like pumpkin seeds, and she 
said, “Really now! Glad you asked. 
According to the Programs, I’ve got 
Nature’s Packaged Life. As it used 
to be. And they showed a picture, 
like two big suns on the ground. And 
they claimed these two little teensy 
tiny things once could cause those 
two big giant things to come out and 
LIE IN A FIELD! If you followed 
instructions right. And tended every- 
thing right. In the Old Days. WITH 
DIRT. Oh my. Hmph! And water. 
And they said something about 
sun-sunlight. Do you think so? 
Whattya think, Daddy? Whattya 
think? WHAT’S DIRT?” 

He cleared his throat and, deep out 
of gullet darkness, he spit up a tiny 
fleck of gold (his throat had been li- 
ned thus against cancer one year ago) 
and he moved his two metal feet just 
slightly at the “toeing of the line,” 
but still toeing, ah yes. And he 
wanted so much to run back to the 
safe-and-known of his hip-snuggle 
chair, and prisoner bands and the cool 
calm programming into the formula, 
to help Control, to die-or-die for 
State. 

But Little Sister was at him and he 
knew it might not be easy. Little Sis- 
ter was just past five, oh sure, but 
what if she, forgetting all the training 
of the Programs, should revert to that 
true age and start up her machine-gun 
questioning: “Whattya think, Daddy? 
whattya think, Daddy? whattya 
think?” while she danced in great 
expectancy and demanded to be in- 
formed. Oh God. She might even 
start her patented fit-dance, where 
she shrieked and fell to the ground 
and kicked. He remembered. 

Now, oh now, he needed her 

124 



mother whole, instead of that female 
jig Mother had become, worked all 
in metal and plastic in all the replac- 
able places, with the giant 
star-diamond rings on those fabulous 
removable fingers and the blue al- 
most-all-replaced eyes staring, now 
always staring, like two very small 
fuzzy full moons out of a green set- 
tling fog while she had those long 
daily rubs, oh, every day! with the 
plastic man. “Why don’t you just go 
to your mother?” he said. “It’s more 
a little girl’s place in the spring to 
question her mother.” He warmed to 
the inspiration, to the idea of “getting 
out of it.” “Just drop by Little 
Brother’s place and both of you then 
run over to Mother’s place and see 
what you can get started. See if she’ll 
give you a little time from old Jon. 
Find out if her phfluggee-phflaggee’ s 
still working. Or is it all rubs now, 
with Mother?” He hated himself for 
this, this slicing underhanded attack 
on Mother and her plastic boy friend. 
He had no right to do this, really, he 
a proud Formula Worker for the State 
and surely above such shabby cheap 
caring and flesh-jealousy concern as 
to whether or not Mother, or even the 
most beautiful woman in the world, 
was rubbed. 

“Going to Mother’s a real bummer 
now-no good,” Little Sister said. 
“And taking Little Brother with me 
is not the least bit of help in this 
world. They’re both too far out, if 
you ask me. Mother’s always on the 
bed for a rub and a bounce, and Little 
Brother’s either blasting off in his 
little Universe-Scoot sports space 
rocket, or getting ready for launch. 
Just play, you know, but it takes up 
his time; hmmph! space probes are 
his whole entire life.” She paused 

GALAXY 




now and sized him with those hard- 
hard eyes she had, and he wondered 
how she would hit and where, know- 
ing hit she would. -“Remember, 
Daddy, remember how BAD you 
helped me at Xmas? About my tree 
star? That fell?- When they let you 
out for one of those BIG EOC’s. And 
you got mad and threatened to cas- 
trate Santa Claus. What’s castrate?- 
Let’s show now you CARE!” 

He ignored everything but his own 
terrible aching dread now. He could 
not help it; he had to ask, and the 
words from his trembling phflug- 
gee-phflaggee came on almost 
self-propelled and hit out like space 
probes; “Have you-did you ever-oh, 
could you tell me. Little Sister-about 
Mother and-?” 

“Sure can. And it’s not just rubs, 
and don’t you ever think it!” Little 
Sister cocked her head and looked at 
her daddy in a very sly-josh way. 1 
think this manner of looking would 
prompt just about anyone to wonder 
just how far this little missy’s knowl- 
edge had traveled already along the 
road of the facts of life, packaged or 
otherwise. And he suddenly remem- 
bered that the Programs had probably 
told her all already about “how it 
used to be” in their supposedly 
VERY scientific approach to getting 
her ready for “how it was to be.” 
But sometimes it all doesn’t work as 
planned with little girls. Just as now, 
some “communication gone astray” 
in the Programs, probably, was what 
had prompted Little Sister to bootleg 
this order for pumpkin seed to that 
criminal seed house over the line in 
Olderan. Unaccountably now, he 
found himself wishing it were sun- 
flower seed. He had once loved those 
big “suns,” some the size of dinner 

SPRING DAY IN MODERAN 



plates, rioting in the hell-hot sim- 
mering fields of high summer across 
a great mid western land. 

He came back to NOW, with a ter- 
rible thud in his thoughts. Cold and 
cold it took him and cold and cold 
he asked from the hurts that are not 
to be described: “What What 
WHAT-does he do-DO-to 
her-besidesBesides-Besides-rubs?” 

“He gouges her every once in 
awhile, sorta hard, with his little old 
short fat stick he’s got on him that 
pops up every so often. SPRINGY! 
Sorta BIG!” 

“Why Why WHY does 

he-DO-do-THAT?” 

“How should I know!? Sometimes 
they get stuck together. Because she 
wants him to, 1 guess. And because 
she wants him to want to, 1 guess, 
and he certainly does, 1 guess, hee 
hee huk.” 

He looked at his little daughter 
laughing there. He wanted to run. He 
wanted to scream. He wanted to tear 
himself to pieces. He wanted to throt- 
tle her. He wanted to lash out at 
everything. He couldn’t talk. His 
phfluggee-phflaggee refused to do its 
job. He pressed the button marked 
WAILS and finally he wailed. 

“Oh Daddy, pipe down, shut that 
thing off-it’s just fun. 
Mama-boyfriend fun. And whatever 
they’re doing, it sure looks 
humpy-good to me. I stand there and 
laugh and laugh. 1 like to watch ’em, 
though, whenever 1 can, through this 
secret peep I’ve got. And when they 
get going good, I just jump around 
in sight and yell, ‘Hi! Mama! Mama! 
hi ! old Plastic Guy ! you old pot. ’ And 
you should see how they scramble to 
sit back in shape and pose natural! 
You’d probably have to press your 

125 




Ho-Ho button on that silly thing 
you’ve got there and die laughin’. 
But, according to the Programs, it’s 
not supposed to be anything to hide 
and be ashamed of. Just good old 
hotsy-totsy fun between two consen- 
ters, as they say. REALLY wantin’ 
it BAD! Huk huk hee.” 

The gold came on up in his aching 
throat-fleck after fleck after fleck 
now and fell to the floor, sounding 
like, in the Old Times, rain-pats as 
he gasped. He just looked at Little 
Sister, expanda-vision tuned to Hor- 
ror-Gaze Gaze-on, He couldn’t speak 
a sound. She seemed at a great dis- 
tance. He waved to her with his hand 
that had all gone tin and his arm that 
was like a ton. She waved back. He 
screamed with his button screamer 
for a full fifteen seconds, for it 
seemed that might help some, some 
noise, some manifestation of outrage. 

“1 don’t think it’s what it oughta 
be at all,” Little Sister said flatly, 
when the button screaming had sub- 
sided. “Too much of a racket. Since 
Mother’s mostly tin and old 
Plasto-Jon’s mostly plastic, they make 
an awful lot of commotion going after 
it the way they do ~jug-u-boom splat 
splat rattle rattle shake-a-shake 
rumple rumple 

ragh-a-ragh-a-ragh-a-ragh 
ohhhhhhh ummmmmmm . ” (Little 
Sister went jerky-jumpy and did lit- 
tle-girl bumps and grinds to illustrate 
her sounds.) “And they really breathe 
hard sometimes, both of them, with 
their breath bags pumping like CRA- 
ZEE! He takes off all Mother’s clothes 
first, every stitch, just before they 
start-nylons and nasties tossed all 
over! Also his. They sorta undo each 
other. Otherwise they’d get too hot. 
Probably. Whattya think, Daddy? 
126 



Whattya think. Daddy? Whattya 
think? 

He fell forward. Or more, he just 
crumpled to a heap on his Formula 
Hut floor and became right before her 
eyes a very sad pile of quite expen- 
sive “replacement’’ metal and 
flesh-strip in a swoon. “Daddy’s 
sick!” she said, mumbling worriedly 
to herself and the whirring emptiness 
around her. "I wonder why Daddy's 
sick? 1 wonder what I should do? Oh 
well-” 

She eyed him with a little girl’s 
real love for her daddy for a couple 
of seconds or so and she decided that 
he would probably eventually be 
O K. on his own, or, if not, the State 
could just melt him up and start over 
as she had seen it done in the Pro- 
grams. So why was she standing 
around, and who cared how it turned 
out anyway? He sure as heck wasn’t 
any help to her right now, and never 
had been, really. Neither had Mother. 
And Little Brother -brrrkkk 
boooooo-b'dd news all the way. So 
she took off, running as hard as she 
could across the planned-greening 
yards, all up with the metal grass now 
after Seasons finally had set the 
wheels right to put old winter on the 
skids and under on the giant yard-sheet 
Control rolls, all over Moderan. 

But she still didn’t know how in 
the world she was going to find some 
dirt, and sneak it, to grow those 
“punkins.” She did know, though, 
one thing: Daddy had certainly been 
as useless as usual in helping her 
solve a problem. 

-David Bunch 



GALAXY 





Books and Magazines 



EVERYTHING in SF and Fantasy. Send 50« 
for big 1979 catalog. Collections also pur- 
chased. Robert Madle. 4406 Bestor Drive. 
Rockville. Md. 20853. 



S.F. & Comics. 46-pg. S.F. List $2.50. 12- 
pg. Comics List 60c. Both $3.00. Send to Brite 
Star, c/o Dave L. Rigdon. 10580 Velma Dr., 
Greenville. Mich. 48838. 



LEARN ABOUT 

TOMORROW . TODAY! Send for free 
72-page catalog of books, periodicals, tapes 
and other information about the future. World 
Future Society. Dept. ER. 4916 St. Elmo 
Ave., Washington, D C. 20014. 



THE PATH, stories in theme, by David Wil- 
son. $2.00. "He opened his eyes to limitless 
depth, star-speckled, falling away from him 
forever . .’’Lorien House. P.O. Box 1112. 
Black Mountain. N C.. 28711. 



TRADE SF: No money. SSAEfor lists. Grant. 
9213 Greenwood Lane. Lanham. Md.. 20801. 



EXOTIC spaceships revealed. For illustrated 
science fiction book, send $3.95 to Spectrum 
Publishing, 4080 Siskivou. Dept G., Santa 
Rosa. Calif. 95405. 



WANTED-Sciencc Fiction. Fantasy and Ad- 
venture Magazines 1960 or older. R. Robin- 
son. 9614 Carriage Rd.. Kensington. Md. 
20795. 



Buy, trade paperbacks. Free list. Roger Bailey, 
Rt. 4, Box 142-A. Charleston. W. Va. 25312. 



ANY BOOK located. Fiction, nonfiction. All 
authors, subjects. Out-of-print book-search 
specialists. Name the book-we’ll find it. 
Write: Books-On-File; Dept. GALA; Box 195; 
Union City. NJ 07087. 



SEXUAL FREEDOM Newsletter. $1 .00. Box 
0105. San Diego. CA 92115. 



SELF-MASTERY NEWSLETTER. Sample. 
$1.00. Newsletter. 833 Joost. San Francisco. 
CA 94127. 



SF stories by Asimov, Bradbury, de Camp. 
Leiber. Sumak on cassette. Free catalog, or 
$1.00 for sample. George Chynoweth. Box 
3163. APO NY 09123, 



SF, new/used. British/American'Canadian. Free 
catalogs. Grant Thiessen. Box G-86. Neche, 
N.D. 58265. 



SPECULATIVE SCIENCE. Monthly news- 
letter. New. Necessity for science-fiction writ- 
ers. Recommended for all readers. $10/yr. 
Carriage and Domicile. Inc. I20F. 300N. 
American Fork, Utah 84003. 



Miscellaneous 



GUARANTEED $78.00 weekly one hour 
daily. Details, send stamped self-addressed 
envelope plus extra stamp. Jacobs. Box 157- 
A. Pippa Passes. Kentucky 41844. 



127 




COLOR SLIDES? Teachers!: Free 

samples/catalog: Dept. G. Geological Educa- 
tion Aids, 17 Leisure Drive, Kirksville. MO. 
63501. 



ORSON WELLES' Original Radio Broadcast 
Recording of The War of the Worlds. Com- 
plete-uncut as heard over CBS Radio on Sun- 
day. October 30. 1938. Transmitted over the 
air in news-bulletin type style 40 years ago. 
this one-hour dramatization of an invasion 
from Mars caused nation-wide panic. A col- 
lector's item! 2-Record Set $15 (includes ship- 
ping). P.O. Box 148. Boston, Mass. 02134. 



1 13 Stamp Collectors/Exchangers in 39 coun- 
tries. List for $1.00. Spiro, “Sixtalmadge," 
Metuchen. NJ 08840. 



FOR SALE: Genuine United States Armed 
Forces surplus clothing, individual equipment, 
packs, boots, survival gear, first aid packets, 
etc. Send $1.00 for our latest catalog to Steve 
J. Pedergnana. Jr., 1036 S. Claremont. Chi- 
cago, IL 60612. 



$$ MAKE A MINT $$ 

In less than 30 days. Guranteed to work. High 
yields from only a few investment dollars. The 
more invested the higher 

Your Yields! 

Works or your money back. Send $! to: PRS 
Investments. P.O. Box 36. WESTMINSTER, 
CO. 80030. 



GREAT SCIENCE-FICTION SHOWS from 
radio’s Golden Era. On cassettes, in fine 
sound, moderately priced. Bradbury, Asimov. 
Heilnein, many more. Free List. Rare Radio. 
Dept. G, Box 117, Sunland, Calif. 91040 



NEW FOR FANTASY AND WAR-GAM- 
ERS. Searchers of Lockmorka is an exciting, 
new experience. Probe the mysteries of a lost 
civilization. Sail the seas to forgotten lands. 
Build an empire. Shape a new world. Battle 
strange creatures. Enter the realm of high ad- 
venture. Send $12 for setup and first ten turns 
(refundable) to: D. L. De Lany & Co., P.O. 
Box 395, Monroe, Utah 84754. 



TEST YOUR 

E.Q. 

(Economics Quotient) 

Write for a free booklet. 
“Economics.' 

Pueblo. Colorado 81009. 



The American Economic System. 
We should oil learn more about it. 




A pubk serves message of 
v MM j ThsMogozro & The Ad w t w i g Comd 
& US Deportment of Commerce 



128 





WHY NOT? 



rvn ■ nvi i a ^ 

Take 4 for 10^ now 

MEMBERSHIP IN THE SCIENCE FICTION BOOK CLUB 



WITH 



675 The Far Ends ol Time 

nd Earth. By Isaac Asimov. 
-in-1 volume containing the 
master's first published 

iovel. Pebble In the Sky, 
,lus Earth la Room Enough 
nd The End of Eternity. Pub. 

d. $12.95 

008 Mission to Moutokin. 

ly Alan Dean Foster. Can 
,nyone help the exploited 
mmanoids of the ice world 
ran-ky-ky — and survive? By 
he author of Splinter of the 
find’s Eye. Special edition 

6658 The Hour ol Ihe Dra- 
gon. By Robert E. Howard, 
[he only complete novel 
about Conan Ihe Cimmerian 
by his original creator. Pub. 
ed $8.95 

7278 . Masters ot Everon. 

By Gordon R. Dickson. Mys- 
tery on another planet — and 
native animals hold the key, 
By the author of Time Slorm. 

Special ed. 



0141 Time Storm. By Gor- 
don R. Dickson. Gripping ad- 
venture and fascinating ideas 
set in a vast scope of time 
and space. Pub. ed. $10.00 

7831 Galaetic Empires. 

Brian Aldiss, ed. Two-volume 
anthology of 26 stories by 
lamous authors Clarke, 
Asimov and others covers the 
Rise and Fall of Galactic Em- 
pires. Comb. pub. ed. 
$17.90 

7286 Jem. By Frederik Pohl. 
Brilliant new novel of intrigue 
and violence on an alien 
planet. By the author of 

Gateway. Explicit scenes 
and language may be offen- 
sive to some. Pub. ed. 
$ 10.00 

2543 The Dragonriders of 
Pern. By Anne McCaffrey. A 
mammoth volume containing 
all three novels: Dragon- 
flight, Dragonquest and The 
White Dragon. Comb. pub. 
ed. $26.05 



4754 The Book of Morgalne, 

By C.J. Cherryh, Exciting 
3-in-1 volume contains Gate 
ot ivrel, Well ol Shiuan, and 
Fires ot Azeroth. Special edi- 
tion. 

4721 Brother to Demons, 
Brother to Gods. By Jack 
Williamson. Humans may 
become extinct — sup- 
planted by races they created 
themselves! Pub. ed. $10.00 
4580 Camber ol Culdi. By 
Katherine Kurtz. In an alter- 
nate universe, Lord Camber, 
member of a race wifh magi- 
cal powers, lights for right. 
Volume I in The Legends of 
Camber of Culdi. Pub. ed 
$8.95 

4606 Saint Camber. By 
Katherine Kurtz. For the good 
ol the realm, Camber must 
change forms with a mur- 
dered man — permanently. 
Volume II in The Legends of 
Camber ol Culdi. Pub. ed. 
$9.95 




How the Science Fiction 
Book Club Works: 

When your application (or membership is accepted, 
you'll receive your introductory package of four books 
for just 10«f, plus shipping and handling. You may ex- 
amine them in your home, and if not completely satis- 
fied, return them within 10 days - membership will be 
cancelled and you'll owe nothing. 

About every 4 weeks (14 times a year), we'li send 
you the Club’s bulletin, Things to Come, 
describing the 2 coming Selections and a 
variety of Alternate choices. If you want 
both Selections, you need do nothing; 

Ihey'il be shipped automatically. If you 
don’t want a Selection, or prefer an ,, 

Alternate, or no book at all, just fill out JUS'' 
the convenient form always provided, . 5 tk 
and return it to us by the date specified 

We allow you at least ten days (or making~your de- 
osion. If you do not receive the form in time to re- 
spond within 10 days and receive an unwanted Selec- 
"°n. you may return it at our expense. 

a member you need take only 4 Selections or 
Alternates during the coming year. You may resign 
,n y time thereafter, or remain a member as long as 

wish. One of the two Selections each month is 

$2.49, Other Selections are slightly higher but 
'•"'ays much less than Publishers' Editions. A ship- 
? n 9 and handling charge Is added to all shipments. 
“Png no money now. But do send the coupon today! 



The Science Fiction Book Club I 

Dept. XR231, Garden City, N.Y. 11530 * 

Yes, i want to join 

Please accept me as a member. Send me the 
4 books I have numbered below and bill me just 
10p (plus shipping and handling). I agree to the 
Club Plan as described in this ad, will take 4 
more books at regular low Club prices during 
the coming year, and may resign any time 
thereafter. SFBC books are selections for ma- 
ture readers. 




| Order not valid without signature. If under 18, parent 
must sign. 



| The Science Fiction Book Club olfers its own complete 

I hardbound editions sometimes altered in size to fit spe- 
cial presses and save members even more. Members 

I accepted m U.S.A. and Canada only. Canadian mem- 
bers will be serviced from Toronto. Oder slightly dilfer- 
^ent in Canada. 51 -SI 7^ 




What if? 



*What if God is a com- 
puter? (#8532) 

*What if you could build 
an elevator to the stars? 
(#4697) 

*What if a Thread could 
devastate a planet? 
(#2543) 



*What if time goes mad - 
tomorrow? (#0141) 
*What if you had to plan 
the survival of galactic 
civilization? (#6221) 
*What if? Why not- 
stimulate your imagina- 
tion with the world’s fi- 
nest speculative fiction? 



Why no 

Take 4 Science Fiction 
Bestsellers for 10$ 



MEMBERSHIP IN THE SCIENCE FICTION BOOKCLUB 




6221 The Foundation Tril- 
ogy. By Isaac Asimov. The 
ends of the galaxy revert to 
barbarism. An SF classic. 
Comb. pub. ed. $20.85 

6593 Han Solo at Stars' 
End. By Brian Daley. That in- 
trepid interstellar smuggler, 
Han Solo, and his furry pal 
Chewbacca are back! Pub. 
ed. $8.95 

6536 The Best Science Fic- 
tion of the Year #8. Terry 
Carr, ed. A dozen stories 
from the past year by Varley, 
Ellison, Vinge, other favo- 
rites. Special edition. 



1040 The Avatar. By Poul 
Anderson. Daring men and 
women brave the unknown 
potentials of an alien trans- 
port machine — and discover 
more than expected! Pub. 
ed. $10.95 

8532 The Hugo Winners, 
Vol. I & II. Giant 2-in-1 vol- 
ume of 23 award-winning 
stories. 1955 to 1970. 
Asimov introduces each. 
Pub. ed. $15.45 

4564 Medusa’s Children. By 

Bob Shaw. Vicious squid-like 
creatures threaten the exis- 
tence of humans living on a 
planet of water. Pub. ed. 
$7.95 

4630 The Stainless Steel 
Rat Wants You. By Harry 
Harrison. The adventures of 
Slippery Jim diGriz as he sets 
oui to save the universe. 
Special edition. 



0075. The Chronicles of 
Amber, by Roger Zelazny. 
Two glorious volumes con- 
tain: Nine Princes in Amber; 
The Guns of Avalon; Sign of 
the Unicorn; The Hand of 
Oberon; The Courts of 
Chaos. Comb. pub. ed. 
$30.30 

4523 Stardance. By Spider 
and Jeanne Robinson. A 
dancer's art opens the way to 
communication with aliens. 
Pub. ed. $8.95 
4697 The Fountains of 
Paradise. By Arthur C. 
Clarke. Important new novel 
by one of the superstars of 
science fiction. Pub. ed. 
$ 10.00 

5207 Titan. By John Varley. 
When a ship is snatched from 
space, the crew finds itself in 
an alien world — inside 
another spaceship! Explicit 
sexual content may be of- 
fensive to some. Pub. ed. 
$9.95 



See previous 



page for more to choose from.