Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
The Undersea Tube
BY L. TAYLOR HANSEN
Classic Reprint from AMAZING STORIES, Nov., 1929
Copyright, 1929, by E. P. Incorporated
[Illustration]
If my friend the engineer had not told me the Tube was dangerous, I
would not have bought a ticket on that fatal night, and the world would
never have learned the story of the Golden Cavern and the City of the
Dead. Having therefore, according to universal custom, first made my
report as the sole survivor of the much-discussed Undersea Tube disaster
to the International Committee for the Investigation of Disasters, I am
now ready to outline that story for the world. Naturally I am aware of
the many wild tales and rumors that have been circulated ever since the
accident, but I must ask my readers to bear with me while I attempt to
briefly sketch, not only the tremendous difficulties to be overcome by
the engineers, but also the wind-propulsion theory which was made use of
in this undertaking; because it is only by understanding something of
these two phases of the Tube's engineering problems that one can
understand the accident and its subsequent revelations.
It will be recalled by those who have not allowed their view of modern
history to become too hazy, that the close of the twentieth century saw
a dream of the engineering world at last realized--the completion of the
long-heralded undersea railroad. It will also be recalled that the
engineers in charge of this stupendous undertaking were greatly
encouraged by the signal success of the first tube under the English
Channel, joining England and France by rail. However, it was from the
second tube across the Channel and the tube connecting Montreal to New
York, as well as the one connecting New York and Chicago, that they
obtained some of their then radical ideas concerning the use of wind
power for propulsion. Therefore, before the Undersea Tube had been
completed, the engineers in charge had decided to make use of the new
method in the world's longest tunnel, and upon that decision work was
immediately commenced upon the blue-prints for the great air pumps that
were to rise at the two ends--Liverpool and New York. However, I will
touch upon the theory of wind-propulsion later and after the manner in
which it was explained to me.
It will be recalled that after great ceremonies, the Tube was begun
simultaneously at the two terminating cities and proceeded through solid
rock--low enough below the ocean floor to overcome the terrible pressure
of the body of water over it, and yet close enough to the sea to
overcome the intensity of subterranean heat. Needless to say, it was an
extremely hazardous undertaking, despite the very careful surveys that
had been made, for the little parties of workmen could never tell when
they would strike a crack or an unexpected crevice that would let down
upon them with a terrible rush, the waters of the Atlantic. But hazard
is adventure, and as the two little groups of laborers dug toward each
other, the eyes of the press followed them with more persistent interest
than it has ever followed the daily toil of any man or group of men,
either before or since.
  *  *  *  *  *
Once the world was startled by the "extree-ee--" announcing that the
English group had broken into an extinct volcano, whose upper end had
apparently been sealed ages before, for it contained not water but
air--curiously close and choking perhaps, but at least it was not the
watery deluge of death. And then came the great discovery. No one who
lived through that time will forget the thrill that quickened the pulse
of mankind when the American group digging through a seam of old lava
under what scientists call the "ancient ridge," broke into a sealed
cavern which gleamed in the probing flashlights of the workers like the
scintillating points of a thousand diamonds. But when they found the
jeweled casket, through whose glass top they peered curiously down upon
the white body of a beautiful woman, partly draped in the ripples of her
heavy, red hair, the world gasped and wondered. As every school child
knows, the casket was opened by curious scientists, who flocked into the
tube from the length of the world, but at the first exposure to the air,
the strange liquid that had protected the body vanished, leaving in the
casket not the white figure, but only a crumbling mass of grey dust. But
the questions that the finding of the cave had raised remained
unanswered.
[Illustration]
Who was this woman? How did she get into the sealed cavern? If she had
been the court favorite of that mythical kingdom, now sunk beneath the
waves, and had been disposed of in court intrigue, why would her
murderers have buried her in such a casket? How had she been killed? An
unknown poison? Perhaps she had been a favorite slave of the monarch.
This view gained many converts among the archaeologists who argued that
from all the evidence we have available, the race carrying the Iberian
or Proto-Egyptian culture, long thought to have been the true refugees
from sinking Atlantis, were a slight dark-haired race. Therefore this
woman must have been a captive. Geologists, analyzing the lava,
announced that it had hardened in air and not in water, while
anthropologists classed the skull of the woman as essentially more
modern than either the Neanderthal or Cro-Magnon types. But the
engineers, secretly fuming at the delay, finally managed to fill up the
cave and press on with their drills.
Then following the arguments that still flourished in the press, came a
tiny little news article and the first message to carry concern to the
hearts of the engineers. The sea had begun to trickle in through one
slight crack. Perhaps it was only because the crevice was located on the
English side of the now famous "ancient ridge" that the article brought
forth any notice at all. But for the engineers it meant the first
warning of possibly ultimate disaster. They could not seal the crack,
and pumps were brought into play. However, as a month wore on, the crack
did not appear to widen to any material extent and the danger cry of a
few pessimists was forgotten.
Finally, it will be remembered, that sounders listening in the rocks
heard the drillers of the other party, and then with wild enthusiasm the
work was pushed on to completion. The long Tube had been dug. Now it
only remained for the sides at the junction to be enlarged and encased
with cast iron, while the work of setting up the great machines designed
to drive the pellet trains through, was also pushed on to its ultimate
end. Man had essayed the greatest feat of engineering ever undertaken in
the history of the planet, and had won. A period of wild celebration
greeted the first human beings to cross each direction below the sea.
Did the volume of water increase that was carried daily out of the Tube
and dumped from the two stations? If it did, the incident was ignored by
the press. Instead, the fact that some "cranks" persisted in calling
man's latest toy unsafe, only attracted more travel. The Undersea Tube
functioned on regular schedule for three years, became the usual method
of ocean transit.
  *  *  *  *  *
This was the state of matters, when on the fourth of March last, our
textile company ordered me to France to straighten out some orders with
the France house, the situation being such that they preferred to send a
man. Why they did not use radio-vision I do not care to state, as this
is my company's business.
Therefore, upon entering my apartment, I was in the midst of packing
when the television phone called me. The jovial features of "Dutch"
Higgins, my one-time college room-mate and now one of the much-maligned
engineers of the Undersea Tube, smiled back at me from the disk.
"Where are you? I thought we had a sort of dinner engagement at my
apartment, Bob."
"By gollies I forgot, Dutch. I'll be right over--before it gets cold."
Then immediately I turned the knob to the Municipal Aerial-car yards,
and ordered my motor, as I grabbed my hat and hurried to the roof. In
due time, of course, I sprang the big surprise of the evening, adding:
"And, of course, I'm going by the Tube, I feel sort of a
half-partnership in it because you were one of the designers."
A curious half-pained look crossed his face. We had finished our meal,
and were smoking with pushed-back chairs. He finished filling his pipe,
and scowled.
"Well? Why don't you say something? Thought you'd be--well, sort of
pleased."
He struck his automatic lighter and drew in a long puff of smoke before
answering.
"Wish you'd take another route, Bob."
"Take another route?"
"Yes. If you want it straight, the Tube is not safe."
"You are joking."
But as I looked into his cold, thoughtful blue eyes, I knew he had never
been more serious.
"I wish that you would go by the Trans-Atlantic Air Liners. They are
just as fast."
"But you used to be so enthusiastic about the Tube, Dutch! Why I
remember when it was being drilled that you would call me up at all
kinds of wild hours to tell me the latest bits of news."
He nodded slowly.
"Yes, that was in the days before the crack."
"Yet you expected to take care of possible leaks, you know," I
countered.
"But this crack opened after the tunnel had been dug past it, and lately
it has opened more."
"Are the other engineers alarmed?"
"No. We are easily taking care of the extra water and again the opening
seems to remain at a stationary width as it has for the past three
years. But we cannot caulk it."
"Are you going to publish these views?"
"No. I made out a minority report. I can do no more."
"Dutch, you are becoming over-cautious. First sign of old age."
"Perhaps," with the old smile.
"But after all it is now more than three years since we have had a talk
on the Tube. After it began to function as well as the Air-Express you
sort of lost interest in it."
"And the world did too."
"Certainly--but the public ever was a fickle mistress. Who said that
before me?"
He laughed and blew out a long puff of smoke.
"Everyone, Bob."
"But as to the Tube, if I cross under the sea, I would want to be as
well informed on the road as I was three years ago. Now in the meantime,
you have dropped interest in the long tunnel while I have become more
interested in textiles--with the result that I have forgotten all I ever
did know--which compared to your grasp of the details, was little
enough."
  *  *  *  *  *
But his face showed none of the old-time animation on the subject. What
a different man, I mused to myself, from that enthusiastic engineering
student that I used to come upon dreaming over his blue-prints. He was
considered "half-cracked" in those days when he would enthuse over his
undersea railroad, but his animated face was lit with inspiration. Now
the light was gone.
"Well, Dutch, how about it? Aren't you going to make me that brief
little sketch of the length plan and cross-section of the Tube? I
remember your sketch of it in college, and it tends to confuse me with
the real changes that were made necessary when the wind-propulsion
method was adopted."
"All right, old timer. You remember that the Tube was widened at the
sides in order that we could make two circular tubes side by side--one
going each way."
"I had forgotten that they were circular."
"That is because of the pressure. A circle presents the best
resistance," and picking an odd envelope from his pocket, he made the
following sketch and passed it to me.
[Illustration:--CROSS-SECTION OF TUBE--]
I nodded as I recognized the cross-section.
"Now the plan of the thing is like this," he added, putting aside his
pipe and pulling a sheet of paper from the corner of his desk.
Rapidly, with all his old accuracy, he sketched the main plan and leaned
over as he handed it to me.
[Illustration:--PLAN OF UNDER-SEA TUBE--]
"You see," he explained, picking up his pipe again, "both pumps work at
one time--in fact, I should say all four, because this plan is
duplicated on the English side. On both ends then, a train is gently
pushed in by an electric locomotive. A car at a time goes through the
gate so that there is a cushion of air between each car. The same thing
happens at Liverpool. Now, when the due train comes out of the suction
tube, it goes on out the gate, but the air behind it travels right on
around and comes in behind the train that is leaving."
"But how are you assured that it will not stall somewhere?"
"It won't be likely to with pressure pumps going behind it and suction
pumps pulling from in front. We can always put extra power on if
necessary. Thus far the road has worked perfectly."
"How much power do you need to send it through, under normal
conditions?"
"Our trains have been averaging about fifty tons, and for that weight we
have found that a pound pressure is quite sufficient. Now, taking the
tunnel's length as four thousand miles (of course it is not that long,
but round figures are most convenient) and the tube width eleven and one
quarter feet each and working this out we have 3,020,000 cubic feet of
free air per minute or 2,904,000 cubic feet of compressed air, which
would use about 70,000 horse power on the air compressor."
"But isn't the speed rather dizzy?"
"Not any more dizzy, Bob, than those old fashioned money-carrying
machines that the department stores used to use--that is in comparison
to size. The average speed is about 360 feet a second. Of course, the
train is allowed to slow down toward the end of its run, even before it
hits the braking machinery beyond the gate."
"But how much pressure did you say would be put on the back of the
diaphragm--I remember that each car has a flat disc on the back that
fits fairly tightly to the tube ..."
"The pressure on the back is less than seven tons. However, the disc
does not fit tight. There are several leaks. For instance, the cars are
as you know, run on the principle of the monorail with a guiding rail on
each side. The grooves for the rails with their three rollers are in
each car. There is a slight leakage of air here."
"You used the turbo type of blower, didn't you?"
"Had to because of the noise. We put some silencing devices on that and
yet we could not kill all of the racket. However a new invention has
come up that we will make use of soon now."
  *  *  *  *  *
"But I can't understand, Dutch, why you seemed so put out when I
announced my intention of going to Europe via the Tube. Why, I can
remember the day when that would have tickled you to death."
"You followed the digging of the Tube, didn't you?"
"Yes, of course."
"You remember the volcano and lava seams?"
"Yes."
"Well, I do not believe that the crack was a pressure crevice. If it had
been, we were far enough below the ocean floor to have partly relieved
the situation by the unusually solid building of the Tube. The
tremendous shell of this new type of specially hardened metal--"
"And the rich concrete that was used as filling! That was one job no one
slipped up on. I remember how you watched it--"
"Yet the crack has widened, Bob, since the Tube was completed."
"How can you be certain?"
"By the amount of water coming through the drain pipes."
"But you said that once more it was stationary."
"Yes, and that is the very thing that proves, I believe, the nature of
the crack."
"I don't follow you."
"Why it isn't a crack at all, Bob. It is an earthquake fault."
"Good heavens, you don't mean--"
"Yes, I do. I mean that the next time the land slips our little tube
will be twisted up like a piece of string, or crushed like an eggshell.
That always was a rocky bit of land. I thought in going that far north,
though, that we had missed the main line of activity; I mean the
disturbances that had once wiped out a whole nation, if your scientists
are correct."
"Then you mean that it is only a matter of time?"
"Yes, and I have been informed by one expert that the old volcanic
activity is not dead either."
"So that is what has stolen away your laugh?"
"Well I am one of the engineers--and they won't suspend the service."
"Fate has played an ugly trick on you, Dutch, and through your own
dreams too. However, you have made me decide to go by the Tube."
He took his pipe out of his mouth and stared at me.
"Sooner or later the Tube will be through, and I have never been across.
Nothing risked--a dull life. Mine has been altogether too dull. I am now
most certainly going by the Tube."
A bit of the old fire lit up his eyes.
"Same old Bob," he grunted as I rose, and then he grasped my hand with a
grin.
"Good luck, my boy, on your journey, and may old Vulcan be out on a
vacation when you pass his door."
Thus we said good-by. I did not know then that I would never see him
again--that he also took the train that night in order to make one last
plea to the International Committee, and so laid down his life with the
passengers for whom he had pleaded.
It was with many conflicting thoughts, however, that I hurried to the
great Terminus that fatal night, where after being ticketed,
photographed and tabulated by an efficient army of clerks, I found
myself in due time, being ushered to my car of the train.
  *  *  *  *  *
For the benefit of those who have never ridden upon the famous "Flier,"
I could describe the cars no better than to say that coming upon them by
night as I did, they looked like a gigantic, shiny worm, of strange
shape, through whose tiny port-holes of heavy glass in the sides, glowed
its luminous vitals.
I was pompously shown to the front car, which very much resembled a
tremendous cartridge--as did all of the other segments of this great
glow-worm.
Having dismissed the porter with a tip and the suspicion that my having
the front car was the work of my friend, who was willing to give me my
money's worth of thrill, and that the porter was aware of this, I stowed
away my bags and started to get ready for bed. I had no sooner taken off
my coat than the door was opened and an old fellow with a mass of silver
hair peered in at me.
"I beg your pardon, sir, but I understand you have engaged this car
alone?"
"Yes."
"I can get no other accommodations tonight. You have an extra berth
here and I must get to Paris tomorrow. I will pay you well--"
I smiled.
"Take it. I was beginning to feel lonesome, anyway."
He bowed gravely and ordered the porter to bring in his things. I
decided he was a musician. Only artists go in for such lovely hair. But
he undressed in dignified silence, not casting so much as another glance
in my direction, while on my part I also forgot his presence when,
looking through the port-hole, I realized that the train had begun to
move. Soon the drone of the propelling engines began to make itself
heard. Then the train began to dip down and the steel sides of the
entrance became too high for me to see over. My friend of the silver
hair had already turned off the light, and now I knew by the darkness
that we had entered the Tube. For some time I lay awake thinking of
"Dutch" and the ultimate failure of his life's dream, as he had outlined
it to me, and then I sank into a deep, dreamless sleep.
I was awakened by a terrible shock that hurled me up against the side of
the compartment. A dull, red glow poured through the port-hole, lighting
up the interior with a weird, bloody reflection. I crept painfully up to
the port-hole and looked out. The strangest sight that man has ever
looked upon met my eyes. The side of the wall had blown out into a
gigantic cavern, and with it the rest of the cars had rolled down the
bluff a tangled, twisted mass of steel. My car had almost passed by, and
now it still stuck in the tube, even though the last port-hole through
which I peered seemed to be suspended in air. But it was not the wrecked
cars from which rose such wails of despair and agony that held my
attention, but the cavern itself. For it was not really a cave, but a
vast underground city whose wide, marble streets stretched away to an
inferno of flame and lava. By the terrible light was lit up a great
white palace with its gold-tipped scrolls, and closer to me, the golden
temple of the Sun, with its tiers of lustrous yellow stairs--stairs worn
by the feet of many generations.
Above the stairs towered the great statue of a man on horseback. He was
dressed in a sort of tunic, and in his uplifted arm he carried a scroll
as if for the people to read. His face was turned toward me, and I
marveled even in that wild moment that the unknown sculptor could have
caught such an expression of appeal. I can see the high intellectual
brow as if it were before me at this moment--the level, sympathetic eyes
and the firm chin.
  *  *  *  *  *
Then something moving caught my eyes, and I swear I saw a child--a
living child coming from the burning city--running madly, breathlessly
from a wave of glowing lava that threatened to engulf him at any moment.
In spite of all the ridicule that has been showered upon me, I still
declare that the child did not come from the wreckage and that he wore a
tunic similar to the one of the statue and not the torn bit of a
nightgown or sheet.
He was some distance from me, but I could plainly see his expression of
wild distraction as he began to climb those gleaming stairs. Strangely
lustrous in the weird light, was that worn stairway of gold--gold, the
ancient metal of the Sun. With the slowness of one about to faint he
dragged himself up, while his breath seemed to be torn from his throat
in agonizing gasps. Behind him, the glowing liquid splashed against the
steps and the yellow metal of the Sun began to drip into its fiery
cauldron.
The child reached the leg of the horse and clung there.
... Then suddenly the whole scene began to shake as if I had been
looking at a mirage, while just behind my car I had a flashing glimpse
in that lurid light of an emerald-green deluge bursting in like a dark
sky of solid water, and in that split-second before a crushing blow upon
my back, even through that tangle of bedclothes, knocked me into
unconsciousness, I seemed to hear again the hopeless note in the voice
of my friend as he said:
"--an earthquake fault."
After what seemed to me aeons of strange, buzzing noises and peculiar
lights, I at last made out the objects around me as those of a hospital.
Men with serious faces were watching me. I have since been told that I
babbled incoherently about "saving the little fellow" and other equally
incomprehensible murmurings. From them I learned that the train the
other way was washed out, a tangled mass of wreckage just like my car,
both terminus stations wrecked utterly, and no one found alive except
myself. So, although I am to be a hopeless cripple, yet I am not sorry
that the skill and untiring patience of the great English surgeon, Dr.
Thompson, managed to nurse back the feeble spark of my life through all
those weeks that I hung on the borderland; for if he had not, the world
never would have known.
As it is, I wonder over the events of that night as if it had not been
an experience at all--but a wild weird dream. Even the gentleman with
the mass of silver hair is a mystery, for he was never identified, and
yet in my mind's recesses I can still hear his cultured voice asking
about the extra berth, and mentioning his pressing mission to Paris. And
somehow, he gives the last touch of strangeness to the events of that
fatal night, and in my mind, he becomes a part of it no less than the
child on the stairs, the burning inferno that lit the background, and
the great statue of that unknown hero who held out his scroll for a
moment in that lurid light, like a symbol from the sunken City of the
Dead.
THE END
Transcriber's Note:
  This etext was first published in _Amazing Stories_ November 1929
  and was produced from _Amazing Stories_ May 1961. Extensive research
  did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this
  publication was renewed. Minor spelling and typographical errors
  have been corrected without note.